 











 


Menu
Log in / Register 
0 Cart 
Search 
Search in: 
This Journal 
    • This Journal 
    • Anywhere 
     
 
 Advanced Search 
Login to your account
Username 
 
Forgot username? 
Password 
 
Forgot password? 
Log in via your institution (Shibboleth) 
Keep me logged in 
 
 
Register 
Create a new account
Are you an ASCE Member? We recommend that you register using the same email address you use to maintain your ASCE Member account.
Email 
 
 
Returning user 
Can't sign in? Forgot your password?
Enter your email address below and we will send you the reset instructions
Email 
 
Retype the code from the picture: 


 
 
 

Cancel 
If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to reset your password
Close 
Can't sign in? Forgot your username?
Enter your email address below and we will send you your username
Email 
 
Retype the code from the picture: 


 
 
 

Cancel 
If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your username
Close 
Change Password
Old Password 
 
New Password 
 

Cancel 
Congrats!
Your password has been changed
Close 



    • Journals 
    • Books
        ◦ Books 
        ◦ Proceedings 
        ◦ Standards 
    • Magazine 
    • Author Services 
    • User Services 
    • ASCE 
    • About Civil Engineering 
    • Contact Us 
    • Donate Now 
    • Shop ASCE 
Connect With Us


Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering 
/ 
Volume 30 Issue 4 - July 2016 

Ontology-Based Multilabel Text Classification of Construction Regulatory Documents
    • Full Text HTML 
    • Details 
    • Figures 
    • References 
    • Related 


Downloaded 400 times
Technical Papers
Ontology-Based Multilabel Text Classification of Construction Regulatory Documents 
Show less Show all authors
Peng Zhou, S.M.ASCE; and Nora El-Gohary, A.M.ASCE
        ◦ Full text 
        ◦ Download 
        ◦ Tools 
            ▪ Download Citation 
            ▪ Add to Favorites 
            ▪ Track Citations 
            ▪ Permissions 
        ◦ Share 
                    
Abstract
In order to fully automate the environmental regulatory compliance checking process, rules should be automatically extracted from applicable environmental regulatory textual documents, such as energy conservation codes. In the authors’ automated compliance checking (ACC) approach, prior to rule extraction, the text is first classified into predefined categories to only retrieve relevant clauses and filter out irrelevant ones, thereby improving the efficiency and accuracy of rule extraction. Machine learning (ML) techniques have been commonly used for text classification (TC). Nonontology-based, ML-based TC has, generally, performed well. However, given the need for an exceptionally high performance in TC to support high performance in ACC, further TC performance improvement is needed. To address this need, an ontology-based TC algorithm is proposed to further improve the classification performance by utilizing the semantic features of the text. A domain ontology for conceptualizing the environmental knowledge was used. The proposed ontology-based TC algorithm was tested on 25 environmental regulatory documents, evaluated using four evaluation metrics, and compared with the authors’ previously utilized ML-based approach. Based on the testing data, the results show that the ontology-based approach consistently outperformed the ML-based approach, under all evaluation metrics.
Recommended 
Cited By 


    • Cited By 
    • Recommended 



Semantic-based Text Classification of Environmental Regulatory Documents for Supporting Automated Environmental Compliance Checking in Construction
Construction Research Congress 2014: Construction in a Global NetworkMay 2014 
Semantic NLP-Based Information Extraction from Construction Regulatory Documents for Automated Compliance Checking
Journal of Computing in Civil EngineeringJuly 2013 
Domain-Specific Hierarchical Text Classification for Supporting Automated Environmental Compliance Checking
Journal of Computing in Civil EngineeringSeptember 2015 
Ontology-Based, Multi-Label Text Classification for Enhanced Information Retrieval for Supporting Automated Environmental Compliance Checking
Computing in Civil and Building Engineering (2014)June 2014 
Semantic Text Classification for Supporting Automated Compliance Checking in Construction
Journal of Computing in Civil EngineeringFebruary 2013 
Show more Show less 


Authors
Peng Zhou, S.M.ASCE
Graduate Student, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Univ. of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 205 N. Mathews Ave., Urbana, IL 61801.
Nora El-Gohary, A.M.ASCE
Assistant Professor, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Univ. of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 205 N. Mathews Ave., Urbana, IL 61801 (corresponding author). E-mail: gohary@illinois.edu
https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)CP.1943-5487.0000530 
Received: October 14, 2014
Accepted: July 16, 2015
Published online: September 30, 2015
ASCE Subject Headings: Environmental issues,Standards and codes,Construction management,Metric systems,Energy efficiency,Information management,Algorithms,Automation Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering 
Vol. 30, Issue 4 (July 2016) 
© 2015 American Society of Civil Engineers




American Society of Civil Engineers 
1801 Alexander Bell Drive
Reston, VA 20191-4400
703-295-6300 | 800-548-2723
ASCE Library
Terms of Use FAQ Subscribe Contact Us 
ASCE
Terms & Conditions Help Privacy 
Services
Civil Engineering Database Bookstore Contract Documents ASCE 7 Online ASCE 7 Hazard Tool 
© 1996–2018, American Society of Civil Engineers 


ShareThis Copy and Paste
