 

We gratefully acknowledge support from
the Simons Foundation
and member institutions 
arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1212.6527
 
 
 
(Help | Advanced search)

Full-text links: 
Download:
    • PDF 
    • Other formats 
    • Tagged PDF  
(license)
Current browse context:
cs.AI
< prev | next > 
new | recent | 1212
Change to browse by:
cs
cs.CL 
References & Citations
    • NASA ADS 
DBLP - CS Bibliography
listing | bibtex 
Eugene Yuta Bann
Google Scholar
Bookmark
(what is this?) 
       
Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
Title: Discovering Basic Emotion Sets via Semantic Clustering on a Twitter Corpus
Authors: Eugene Yuta Bann
(Submitted on 28 Dec 2012)
Abstract: A plethora of words are used to describe the spectrum of human emotions, but how many emotions are there really, and how do they interact? Over the past few decades, several theories of emotion have been proposed, each based around the existence of a set of 'basic emotions', and each supported by an extensive variety of research including studies in facial expression, ethology, neurology and physiology. Here we present research based on a theory that people transmit their understanding of emotions through the language they use surrounding emotion keywords. Using a labelled corpus of over 21,000 tweets, six of the basic emotion sets proposed in existing literature were analysed using Latent Semantic Clustering (LSC), evaluating the distinctiveness of the semantic meaning attached to the emotional label. We hypothesise that the more distinct the language is used to express a certain emotion, then the more distinct the perception (including proprioception) of that emotion is, and thus more 'basic'. This allows us to select the dimensions best representing the entire spectrum of emotion. We find that Ekman's set, arguably the most frequently used for classifying emotions, is in fact the most semantically distinct overall. Next, taking all analysed (that is, previously proposed) emotion terms into account, we determine the optimal semantically irreducible basic emotion set using an iterative LSC algorithm. Our newly-derived set (Accepting, Ashamed, Contempt, Interested, Joyful, Pleased, Sleepy, Stressed) generates a 6.1% increase in distinctiveness over Ekman's set (Angry, Disgusted, Joyful, Sad, Scared). We also demonstrate how using LSC data can help visualise emotions. We introduce the concept of an Emotion Profile and briefly analyse compound emotions both visually and mathematically. 
Comments: 
University of Bath BSc(Hons) Computer Science Dissertation, 105 Pages
Subjects: 
Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI); Computation and Language (cs.CL)
Report number: 
CSBU-2013-01
Cite as: 
arXiv:1212.6527 [cs.AI]
 
(or arXiv:1212.6527v1 [cs.AI] for this version)
Bibliographic data
[Enable Bibex(What is Bibex?)]
Submission history
From: Eugene Yuta Bann [view email] 
[v1] Fri, 28 Dec 2012 15:39:46 GMT (7724kb,D)
Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) 
Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact.

