
 

We gratefully acknowledge support from
the Simons Foundation
and member institutions 
arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1309.0238
 
 
 
(Help | Advanced search)

Full-text links: 
Download:
    • PDF 
    • PostScript 
    • Other formats 
(license)
Current browse context:
cs.LG
< prev | next > 
new | recent | 1309
Change to browse by:
cs
cs.MS 
References & Citations
    • NASA ADS 
DBLP - CS Bibliography
listing | bibtex 
Lars Buitinck
Gilles Louppe
Mathieu Blondel
Fabian Pedregosa
Andreas Mueller
... 
Google Scholar
Bookmark
(what is this?) 
       
Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title: API design for machine learning software: experiences from the scikit-learn project
Authors: Lars Buitinck (ILPS), Gilles Louppe, Mathieu Blondel, Fabian Pedregosa (INRIA Saclay - Ile de France), Andreas Mueller, Olivier Grisel, Vlad Niculae, Peter Prettenhofer, Alexandre Gramfort (INRIA Saclay - Ile de France, LTCI), Jaques Grobler (INRIA Saclay - Ile de France), Robert Layton, Jake Vanderplas, Arnaud Joly, Brian Holt, Gaël Varoquaux (INRIA Saclay - Ile de France)
(Submitted on 1 Sep 2013)
Abstract: Scikit-learn is an increasingly popular machine learning li- brary. Written in Python, it is designed to be simple and efficient, accessible to non-experts, and reusable in various contexts. In this paper, we present and discuss our design choices for the application programming interface (API) of the project. In particular, we describe the simple and elegant interface shared by all learning and processing units in the library and then discuss its advantages in terms of composition and reusability. The paper also comments on implementation details specific to the Python ecosystem and analyzes obstacles faced by users and developers of the library. 
Subjects: 
Machine Learning (cs.LG); Mathematical Software (cs.MS)
Journal reference: 
European Conference on Machine Learning and Principles and Practices of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (2013)
Cite as: 
arXiv:1309.0238 [cs.LG]
 
(or arXiv:1309.0238v1 [cs.LG] for this version)
Bibliographic data
[Enable Bibex(What is Bibex?)]
Submission history
From: Gael Varoquaux [view email] 
[v1] Sun, 1 Sep 2013 16:22:48 GMT (28kb)
Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) 
Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact.

