 

We gratefully acknowledge support from
the Simons Foundation
and member institutions 
arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1611.05480
 
 
 
(Help | Advanced search)

Full-text links: 
Download:
    • PDF 
    • Other formats 
(license)
Current browse context:
cs.IR
< prev | next > 
new | recent | 1611
Change to browse by:
cs
cs.LG 
References & Citations
    • NASA ADS 
DBLP - CS Bibliography
listing | bibtex 
Jianbo Yuan
Walid Shalaby
Mohammed Korayem
David Lin
Khalifeh AlJadda
... 
Google Scholar
Bookmark
(what is this?) 
       
Computer Science > Information Retrieval
Title: Solving Cold-Start Problem in Large-scale Recommendation Engines: A Deep Learning Approach
Authors: Jianbo Yuan, Walid Shalaby, Mohammed Korayem, David Lin, Khalifeh AlJadda, Jiebo Luo
(Submitted on 16 Nov 2016)
Abstract: Collaborative Filtering (CF) is widely used in large-scale recommendation engines because of its efficiency, accuracy and scalability. However, in practice, the fact that recommendation engines based on CF require interactions between users and items before making recommendations, make it inappropriate for new items which haven't been exposed to the end users to interact with. This is known as the cold-start problem. In this paper we introduce a novel approach which employs deep learning to tackle this problem in any CF based recommendation engine. One of the most important features of the proposed technique is the fact that it can be applied on top of any existing CF based recommendation engine without changing the CF core. We successfully applied this technique to overcome the item cold-start problem in Careerbuilder's CF based recommendation engine. Our experiments show that the proposed technique is very efficient to resolve the cold-start problem while maintaining high accuracy of the CF recommendations. 
Comments: 
in Big Data, IEEE International Conference on, 2016
Subjects: 
Information Retrieval (cs.IR); Machine Learning (cs.LG)
Cite as: 
arXiv:1611.05480 [cs.IR]
 
(or arXiv:1611.05480v1 [cs.IR] for this version)
Bibliographic data
[Enable Bibex(What is Bibex?)]
Submission history
From: Jianbo Yuan [view email] 
[v1] Wed, 16 Nov 2016 22:03:04 GMT (488kb,D)
Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) 
Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact.

