 

We gratefully acknowledge support from
the Simons Foundation
and member institutions 
arXiv.org > q-bio > arXiv:1701.06279
 
 
 
(Help | Advanced search)

Full-text links: 
Download:
    • PDF 
    • Other formats 
(license)
Current browse context:
q-bio.QM
< prev | next > 
new | recent | 1701
Change to browse by:
cs
cs.CL
cs.LG
q-bio
stat
stat.ML 
References & Citations
    • NASA ADS 
Google Scholar
Bookmark
(what is this?) 
       
Quantitative Biology > Quantitative Methods
Title: dna2vec: Consistent vector representations of variable-length k-mers
Authors: Patrick Ng
(Submitted on 23 Jan 2017)
Abstract: One of the ubiquitous representation of long DNA sequence is dividing it into shorter k-mer components. Unfortunately, the straightforward vector encoding of k-mer as a one-hot vector is vulnerable to the curse of dimensionality. Worse yet, the distance between any pair of one-hot vectors is equidistant. This is particularly problematic when applying the latest machine learning algorithms to solve problems in biological sequence analysis. In this paper, we propose a novel method to train distributed representations of variable-length k-mers. Our method is based on the popular word embedding model word2vec, which is trained on a shallow two-layer neural network. Our experiments provide evidence that the summing of dna2vec vectors is akin to nucleotides concatenation. We also demonstrate that there is correlation between Needleman-Wunsch similarity score and cosine similarity of dna2vec vectors. 
Comments: 
10 pages, 3 figures, 2 tables
Subjects: 
Quantitative Methods (q-bio.QM); Computation and Language (cs.CL); Machine Learning (cs.LG); Machine Learning (stat.ML)
Cite as: 
arXiv:1701.06279 [q-bio.QM]
 
(or arXiv:1701.06279v1 [q-bio.QM] for this version)

Submission history
From: Patrick Ng [view email] 
[v1] Mon, 23 Jan 2017 07:21:43 GMT (23kb,D)
Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) 
Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact.

