 

We gratefully acknowledge support from
the Simons Foundation
and member institutions 
arXiv.org > stat > arXiv:1705.10359
 
 
 
(Help | Advanced search)

Full-text links: 
Download:
    • PDF 
    • Other formats 
(license)
Current browse context:
stat.ML
< prev | next > 
new | recent | 1705
Change to browse by:
cs
cs.LG
stat 
References & Citations
    • NASA ADS 
Google Scholar
Bookmark
(what is this?) 
       
Statistics > Machine Learning
Title: Neural Embeddings of Graphs in Hyperbolic Space
Authors: Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, James Clough, Marc Peter Deisenroth
(Submitted on 29 May 2017)
Abstract: Neural embeddings have been used with great success in Natural Language Processing (NLP). They provide compact representations that encapsulate word similarity and attain state-of-the-art performance in a range of linguistic tasks. The success of neural embeddings has prompted significant amounts of research into applications in domains other than language. One such domain is graph-structured data, where embeddings of vertices can be learned that encapsulate vertex similarity and improve performance on tasks including edge prediction and vertex labelling. For both NLP and graph based tasks, embeddings have been learned in high-dimensional Euclidean spaces. However, recent work has shown that the appropriate isometric space for embedding complex networks is not the flat Euclidean space, but negatively curved, hyperbolic space. We present a new concept that exploits these recent insights and propose learning neural embeddings of graphs in hyperbolic space. We provide experimental evidence that embedding graphs in their natural geometry significantly improves performance on downstream tasks for several real-world public datasets. 
Comments: 
7 pages, 5 figures
Subjects: 
Machine Learning (stat.ML); Machine Learning (cs.LG)
Journal reference: 
13th international workshop on mining and learning from graphs held in conjunction with KDD, 2017
Cite as: 
arXiv:1705.10359 [stat.ML]
 
(or arXiv:1705.10359v1 [stat.ML] for this version)

Submission history
From: Benjamin Chamberlain [view email] 
[v1] Mon, 29 May 2017 18:47:30 GMT (4761kb,D)
Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) 
Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact.

