 

We gratefully acknowledge support from
the Simons Foundation
and member institutions 
arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1807.10800
 
 
 
(Help | Advanced search)

Full-text links: 
Download:
    • PDF only 

Current browse context:
cs.CL
< prev | next > 
new | recent | 1807
Change to browse by:
cs 
References & Citations
    • NASA ADS 
Google Scholar
Bookmark
(what is this?) 
       
Computer Science > Computation and Language
Title: Clustering Prominent People and Organizations in Topic-Specific Text Corpora
Authors: Abdulkareem Alsudais, Hovig Tchalian
(Submitted on 27 Jul 2018)
Abstract: Named entities in text documents are the names of people, organization, location or other types of objects in the documents that exist in the real world. A persisting research challenge is to use computational techniques to identify such entities in text documents. Once identified, several text mining tools and algorithms can be utilized to leverage these discovered named entities and improve NLP applications. In this paper, a method that clusters prominent names of people and organizations based on their semantic similarity in a text corpus is proposed. The method relies on common named entity recognition techniques and on recent word embeddings models. The semantic similarity scores generated using the word embeddings models for the named entities are used to cluster similar entities of the people and organizations types. Two human judges evaluated ten variations of the method after it was run on a corpus that consists of 4,821 articles on a specific topic. The performance of the method was measured using three quantitative measures. The results of these three metrics demonstrate that the method is effective in clustering semantically similar named entities. 
Subjects: 
Computation and Language (cs.CL)
Cite as: 
arXiv:1807.10800 [cs.CL]
 
(or arXiv:1807.10800v1 [cs.CL] for this version)
Bibliographic data
[Enable Bibex(What is Bibex?)]
Submission history
From: Abdulkareem Alsudais [view email] 
[v1] Fri, 27 Jul 2018 19:00:01 GMT (1114kb)
Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) 
Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact.

