 

Research Repository

Login 
Research Repository home About Repository policies Open access Discover 
Latest additions Simple search Advanced search Browse by Year Browse by Subject Browse by Department Browse by Author 
Atom RSS 1.0 RSS 2.0 
Patent Thickets Identification 
Gątkowski, Mateusz and Dietl, Marek and Skrok, Lukasz and Whalen, Ryan and Rockett, Katharine (2018) Patent Thickets Identification. Working Paper. University of Essex, Department of Economics, Economics Discussion Papers, Colchester. 


Preview
Text 
Towards a New Method for Patent Thickets Identification_Sept_WP.pdf 
Download (2MB) | Preview 
Abstract
Patent thickets have been identified by various citations-based techniques, such as Graevenitz et al (2011) and Clarkson (2005). An alternative direct measurement is based on expert opinion. We use natural language processing techniques to measure pairwise semantic similarity of patents identified as thicket members by experts to create a semantic network. We compare the semantic similarity scores for patents in different expert-identified thickets: those within the same thicket, those in different thickets, and those not in thickets. We show that patents within the same thicket are significantly more semantically similar than other pairs of patents. We then present a statistical model to assess the probability of a newly added patent belonging to a thicket based on semantic networks as well as other measures from the existing thicket literature (the triples of Graevenitz and Clarkson’s density ratio). We conclude that combining information from semantic distance with other sources can be helpful to isolate the patents that are likely to be members of thickets.
Item Type:
Monograph (Working Paper) 
Uncontrolled Keywords:
Patent Thickets Identification, Intellectual Property, Patenting, Patent Thickets, Semantic Distance, Latent Semantic Analysis, Natural Language Processing, Complexity
Subjects:
H Social Sciences > HB Economic Theory
Divisions:
Faculty of Social Sciences > Economics, Department of 
Depositing User:
Elements 
Date Deposited:
04 Sep 2018 11:49
Last Modified:
11 Sep 2018 11:29
URI:
http://repository.essex.ac.uk/id/eprint/22928
Actions (login required)

View Item
About
This is the University of Essex Research Repository Service.

Contact
Any correspondence concerning this specific repository should be sent to repository@essex.ac.uk 
Credits
The University of Essex Research Repository is powered by EPrints 3 which is developed by the School of Electronics and Computer Science at the University of Southampton. More information and software credits.
OAI
The University of Essex Research Repository supports OAI 2.0 with a base URL of http://repository.essex.ac.uk/cgi/oai2 
© 2015 University of Essex. All rights reserved

