IEEE websites place cookies on your device to give you the best user experience. By using our websites, you agree to the placement of these cookies. To learn more, read our Privacy Policy.
Accept & Close
  
The Community for Technology Leaders


 
    •   
    • Libraries & Institutions 
    • About 
    • Resources 
        ◦ RSS Feeds 
        ◦ Newsletter 
        ◦ Terms of Use 
        ◦ Peer Review 
    • Subscribe 
    • LOGIN 
    • Welcome F Friedrich-Althoff-Consortia Berlin-Brandenburg (consortium) ~ Universitas 
CSDL Home S SITIS 2014 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Discovering Similarities for Content-Based Recommendation and Browsing in Multimedia Collections
2014 Tenth International Conference on Signal-Image Technology & Internet-Based Systems (SITIS) (2014)
Marrakech, Morocco
Nov. 23, 2014 to Nov. 27, 2014
ISBN: 978-1-4799-7978-3
pp: 237-243
DOI Bookmark: http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/SITIS.2014.98
Taras Lehinevych 
Nikolaos Kokkinis-Ntrenis 
Giorgos Siantikos 
A. Seza Dogruoz 
Theodoros Giannakopoulos 
Stasinos Konstantopoulos 
ABSTRACT
The purpose of the research described in this paper is to examine the existence of correlation between low level audio, visual and textual features and movie content similarity. In order to focus on a well defined and controlled case, we have built a small dataset of movie scenes from three sequel movies. In addition, manual annotations have led to a ground-truth similarity matrix between the adopted scenes. Then, three similarity matrices (one for each medium) have been computed based on Gaussian Mixture Models (audio and visual) and Latent Semantic Indexing (text). We have evaluated the automatically extracted similarities along with two simple fusion approaches and results indicate that the low-level features can lead to an accurate representation of the movie content. In addition, the fusion approach seems to outperform the individual modalities, which is a strong indication that individual modules lead to diverse similarities (in terms of content). Finally, we have evaluated the extracted similarities for different groups of human annotators, based on what a human interprets as similar and the results show that different groups of people correlate better with different modalities. This last result is very important and can be either used in (a) a personalized content-based retrieval and recommender system and (b) in a local weighted fusion approach, in future research.
INDEX TERMS
Feature extraction, Motion pictures, Visualization, Multimedia communication, Recommender systems, Collaboration
CITATION

T. Lehinevych, N. Kokkinis-Ntrenis, G. Siantikos, A. S. Dogruoz, T. Giannakopoulos and S. Konstantopoulos, "Discovering Similarities for Content-Based Recommendation and Browsing in Multimedia Collections," 2014 Tenth International Conference on Signal-Image Technology & Internet-Based Systems (SITIS), Marrakech, Morocco, 2014, pp. 237-243.
doi:10.1109/SITIS.2014.98
FULL ARTICLE

PDF 

BUY 

RSS Feed 

SUBSCRIBE 
CITATIONS
 
Plain Text 
 
BibTex 
 
RIS 
SEARCH
Articles by Taras Lehinevych
Articles by Nikolaos Kokkinis-Ntrenis
Articles by Giorgos Siantikos
Articles by A. Seza Dogruoz
Articles by Theodoros Giannakopoulos
Articles by Stasinos Konstantopoulos
SHARE
Digg 
Facebook 
Google+ 
LinkedIn 
Reddit 
Tumblr 
Twitter 
Stumbleupon 




This site and all contents (unless otherwise noted) are Copyright © 2018 IEEE. All rights reserved.
87 ms
(Ver 3.3 (11022016)) 
 
