Skip to Main Content 
By continuing to browse this site, you agree to its use of cookies as described in our Cookie Policy.×
 
 
    • This Journal
    • Anywhere
    • Search term
      Advanced Search Citation Search
      Search
    • Search term
      Advanced Search Citation Search
      Search
Login / Register 
The full text of this article hosted at iucr.org is unavailable due to technical difficulties. 
 

The Journal of Competency-Based Education
Volume 0, Issue 0  
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
Free Access
Enhancing efficiency, reliability, and rigor in competency model analysis using natural language processing
Andrew N. Garman
Corresponding Author
E-mail address:Andy_N_Garman@rush.edu
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6733-4951
Health Systems Management, Rush University, Chicago, Illinois
Correspondence
Andrew N. Garman, Health Systems Management, Rush University, 1700 W. Van Buren St., Ste 126B, Chicago, IL 60612.
Email: Andy_N_Garman@rush.edu
Search for more papers by this author
Melanie P. Standish
Industrial/Organizational Psychology, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois
Search for more papers by this author
Dae Hyun Kim
Department of Health Administration, University of Alabama Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama
Search for more papers by this author
Andrew N. Garman
Corresponding Author
E-mail address:Andy_N_Garman@rush.edu
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6733-4951
Health Systems Management, Rush University, Chicago, Illinois
Correspondence
Andrew N. Garman, Health Systems Management, Rush University, 1700 W. Van Buren St., Ste 126B, Chicago, IL 60612.
Email: Andy_N_Garman@rush.edu
Search for more papers by this author
Melanie P. Standish
Industrial/Organizational Psychology, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois
Search for more papers by this author
Dae Hyun Kim
Department of Health Administration, University of Alabama Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama
Search for more papers by this author
First published: 12 June 2018
https://doi.org/10.1002/cbe2.1164
Read the full text
About

PDF
PDF
Tools
    • Request permission
    • Export citation
    • Add to favorites
    • Track citation
Share
Give access
Share full text access
Share full text access
Please review our Terms and Conditions of Use and check box below to share full-text version of article.
I have read and accept the Wiley Online Library Terms and Conditions of Use.

Shareable Link
Use the link below to share a full-text version of this article with your friends and colleagues. Learn more.
Copy URL
Share a link
    • Email to a friend
    • Facebook
    • Twitter
    • Linkedin
    • Google+
    • Reddit
    • CiteULike
Abstract
Background
Competency modeling is frequently used in higher education and workplace settings to inform a variety of learning and performance improvement programs. However, approaches commonly taken to modeling tasks can be very labor‐intensive, and are vulnerable to perceptual and experience biases of raters.
Aims
The present study assesses the potential for natural language processing (NLP) to support competency‐related tasks, by developing a baseline comparison of results generated by NLP to results generated by human raters.
Methods
Two raters separately conducted cross‐walks for leadership competency models of graduate healthcare management programs from eight universities against a newly validated competency model from the National Center for Healthcare Leadership containing 28 competencies, to create 224 cross‐walked pairs of “best matches”.
Results
Results indicated that the NLP model performed at least as accurately as human raters, who required a total of 16 work hours to complete, versus the NLP calculations which were nearly instantaneous.
Conclusion
Based on these findings, we conclude that NLP has substantial promise as a high‐efficiency adjunct to human evaluations in competency cross‐walks.

Early View
Online Version of Record before inclusion in an issue
e01164
 

    • Figures
    • References
    • Related
    • Information
    •  
      
    • 
Caption
Additional links 
About Wiley Online Library
    • Privacy Policy 
    • Terms of Use 
    • Cookies 
    • Accessibility 
Help & Support
    • Contact Us 
Opportunities
    • Subscription Agents 
    • Advertisers & Corporate Partners 
Connect with Wiley
    • The Wiley Network 
    • Wiley Press Room 
Copyright © 1999-2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved
 
 
Log in to Wiley Online Library
Email or Customer ID 
 
Password 
 
Forgot password? 
 
NEW USER > INSTITUTIONAL LOGIN > 
 
Change Password
Old Password 
 
New Password 
 
Too Short Weak Medium Strong Very Strong Too Long 

Congrats!
Your password has been changed
Create a new account
Email or Customer ID 
 
 
Returning user 
 
Forgot your password?
Enter your email address below. If your address has been previously registered, you will receive an email with instructions on how to reset your password. If you don't receive an email, you should register as a new user
Email or Customer ID 
 
 
Please check your email for your password reset instructions.
Request Username
Can't sign in? Forgot your username?
Enter your email address below and we will send you your username
Email or Customer ID 
 
 
Close 
If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your username




