Skip to Main Content 
By continuing to browse this site, you agree to its use of cookies as described in our Cookie Policy.×
 
 
    • This Journal
    • Anywhere
    • Search term
      Advanced Search Citation Search
      Search
    • Search term
      Advanced Search Citation Search
      Search
Login / Register 
The full text of this article hosted at iucr.org is unavailable due to technical difficulties. 
 

ETRI Journal
Volume 39, Issue 4  
Article 
Free Access
Fine‐Grained Mobile Application Clustering Model Using Retrofitted Document Embedding
Yeo‐Chan Yoon
E-mail address:ycyoon@etri.re.kr
Search for more papers by this author
Junwoo Lee
E-mail address:leejw@etri.re.kr
Search for more papers by this author
So‐Young Park
Corresponding Author
E-mail address:ssoya@smu.ac.kr
Search for more papers by this author
Changki Lee
E-mail address:leeck@kangwon.ac.kr
Search for more papers by this author
Yeo‐Chan Yoon
E-mail address:ycyoon@etri.re.kr
Search for more papers by this author
Junwoo Lee
E-mail address:leejw@etri.re.kr
Search for more papers by this author
So‐Young Park
Corresponding Author
E-mail address:ssoya@smu.ac.kr
Search for more papers by this author
Changki Lee
E-mail address:leeck@kangwon.ac.kr
Search for more papers by this author
First published: 11 August 2017
https://doi.org/10.4218/etrij.17.0116.0936
This work was supported by Institute for Information & communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (R0118‐16‐1005, Digital Contents In‐House R&D).
Yeo‐Chan Yoon (ycyoon@etri.re.kr) and Junwoo Lee (leejw@etri.re.kr) are with the SW & Content Research Laboratory, ETRI, Daejeon, Rep. of Korea. 
So‐Young Park (corresponding author, ssoya@smu.ac.kr) is with the Department of Game Design and Development, Sangmyung University, Seoul, Rep. of Korea. 
Changki Lee (leeck@kangwon.ac.kr) is with the Department of Computer Science, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Rep. of Korea. 
Read the full text
About

PDF
PDF
Tools
    • Request permission
    • Export citation
    • Add to favorites
    • Track citation
Share
Give access
Share full text access
Share full text access
Please review our Terms and Conditions of Use and check box below to share full-text version of article.
I have read and accept the Wiley Online Library Terms and Conditions of Use.

Shareable Link
Use the link below to share a full-text version of this article with your friends and colleagues. Learn more.
Copy URL
Share a link
    • Email to a friend
    • Facebook
    • Twitter
    • Linkedin
    • Google+
    • Reddit
    • CiteULike
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a fine‐grained mobile application clustering model using retrofitted document embedding. To automatically determine the clusters and their numbers with no predefined categories, the proposed model initializes the clusters based on title keywords and then merges similar clusters. For improved clustering performance, the proposed model distinguishes between an accurate clustering step with titles and an expansive clustering step with descriptions. During the accurate clustering step, an automatically tagged set is constructed as a result. This set is utilized to learn a high‐performance document vector. During the expansive clustering step, more applications are then classified using this document vector. Experimental results showed that the purity of the proposed model increased by 0.19, and the entropy decreased by 1.18, compared with the K‐means algorithm. In addition, the mean average precision improved by more than 0.09 in a comparison with a support vector machine classifier.

Volume39, Issue4
August 2017
Pages 443-454
 

    • Figures
    • References
    • Related
    • Information
    •  
      
    • 
Caption
Additional links 
About Wiley Online Library
    • Privacy Policy 
    • Terms of Use 
    • Cookies 
    • Accessibility 
Help & Support
    • Contact Us 
Opportunities
    • Subscription Agents 
    • Advertisers & Corporate Partners 
Connect with Wiley
    • The Wiley Network 
    • Wiley Press Room 
Copyright © 1999-2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved
 
 
Log in to Wiley Online Library
Email or Customer ID 
 
Password 
 
Forgot password? 
 
NEW USER > INSTITUTIONAL LOGIN > 
 
Change Password
Old Password 
 
New Password 
 
Too Short Weak Medium Strong Very Strong Too Long 

Congrats!
Your password has been changed
Create a new account
Email or Customer ID 
 
 
Returning user 
 
Forgot your password?
Enter your email address below. If your address has been previously registered, you will receive an email with instructions on how to reset your password. If you don't receive an email, you should register as a new user
Email or Customer ID 
 
 
Please check your email for your password reset instructions.
Request Username
Can't sign in? Forgot your username?
Enter your email address below and we will send you your username
Email or Customer ID 
 
 
Close 
If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your username



