 Skip to main content 

Journals & BooksRegisterSign in
    • 
    • Journals & Books
    • Register
    • Sign InHelp
 
Outline

Get AccessGet Access


Export
Advanced
Outline
    1. Highlights
    2. Abstract
    3. Keywords
    4. 1. Introduction
    5. 2. Related work
    6. 3. Proposed method
    7. 4. Experiments
    8. 5. Conclusions
    9. Acknowledgments
    10. Appendix A. RO-BoEW derivatives
    11. Appendix B. Parameter selection
    12. References
    13. Vitae
Show full outline
Figures (13)
    1. 
    2. 
    3. 
    4. 
    5. 
    6. 
Show all figures
Tables (6)
    1. Table 1
    2. Table 2
    3. Table 3
    4. Table 4
    5. Table 5
    6. Table 6
JavaScript is disabled on your browser. Please enable JavaScript to use all the features on this page.

Pattern Recognition
Volume 81, September 2018, Pages 254-267

Learning bag-of-embedded-words representations for textual information retrieval

Author links open overlay panelNikolaosPassalisAnastasiosTefas
Show more
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2018.04.008Get rights and content

Highlights
•
A novel BoF-based model is proposed for efficiently representing text documents.
•
A weighting mask (similar to the traditional BoW weighting schemes) is learned.
•
The BoEW is optimized end-to-end (from the word embeddings to the weighting mask).
•
The learned representation can be efficiently finetuned using relevance feedback.
•
The proposed method is evaluated using three text collections from different domains.
Abstract
Word embedding models are able to accurately model the semantic content of words. The process of extracting a set of word embedding vectors from a text document is similar to the feature extraction step of the Bag-of-Features (BoF) model, which is usually used in computer vision tasks. This gives rise to the proposed Bag-of-Embedded Words (BoEW) model that can efficiently represent text documents overcoming the limitations of previously predominantly used techniques, such as the textual Bag-of-Words model. The proposed method extends the regular BoF model by a) incorporating a weighting mask that allows for altering the importance of each learned codeword and b) by optimizing the model end-to-end (from the word embeddings to the weighting mask). Furthermore, the BoEW model also provides a fast way to fine-tune the learned representation towards the information need of the user using relevance feedback techniques. Finally, a novel spherical entropy objective function is proposed to optimize the learned representation for retrieval using the cosine similarity metric.
    • Previous article in issue
    • Next article in issue
Keywords
Word embeddings
Bag-of-words
Bag-of-features
Dictionary learning
Relevance feedback
Information retrieval
Recommended articlesCiting articles (0)
Nikolaos Passalis is a Ph.D. candidate and researcher in the Artificial Intelligence & Information Analysis Laboratory of the Department of Informatics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. He obtained his B.Sc. in Informatics in 2013 and his M.Sc. in Information Systems in 2015 from Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. His research interests include deep learning, computational intelligence and information retrieval. His doctoral studies are supported by the General Secretariat for Research and Technology (GSRT) and the Hellenic Foundation for Research and Innovation (HFRI).
Anastasios Tefas received the B.Sc. in informatics in 1997 and the Ph.D. degree in informatics in 2002, both from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. Since 2017 he has been an Associate Professor at the Department of Informatics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. From 2008 to 2017, he was a Lecturer, Assistant Professor at the same University. From 2006 to 2008, he was an Assistant Professor at the Department of Information Management, Technological Institute of Kavala. From 2003 to 2004, he was a temporary lecturer in the Department of Informatics, University of Thessaloniki. From 1997 to 2002, he was a researcher and teaching assistant in the Department of Informatics, University of Thessaloniki. Dr. Tefas participated in 12 research projects financed by national and European funds. He has co-authored 76 journal papers, 188 papers in international conferences and contributed 8 chapters to edited books in his area of expertise. Over 3730 citations have been recorded to his publications and his H-index is 32 according to Google scholar. His current research interests include computational intelligence, deep learning, pattern recognition, statistical machine learning, digital signal and image analysis and retrieval and computer vision.
© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
            ▪ Joint intermodal and intramodal correlation preservation for semi-paired learning
      Pattern Recognition, Volume 81, 2018, pp. 36-49
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ Clustering ensembles: A hedonic game theoretical approach
      Pattern Recognition, Volume 81, 2018, pp. 95-111
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ Learning with privileged information for multi-Label classification
      Pattern Recognition, Volume 81, 2018, pp. 60-70
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
12Next
Citing articles (0)
Article Metrics
View article metrics
About ScienceDirectRemote accessShopping cartContact and supportTerms and conditionsPrivacy policy
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.
 

