 Skip to main content 

Journals & BooksRegisterSign in
    • 
    • Journals & Books
    • Register
    • Sign InHelp
 
Outline

Get AccessGet Access


Export
Advanced
Outline
    1. Abstract
    2. JEL classification
    3. Keywords
    4. 1. Introduction
    5. 2. NIH grants and the ARRA program
    6. 3. Data and sample
    7. 4. Empirical analysis
    8. 5. Discussion
    9. 6. Conclusion
    10. Acknowledgement
    11. Appendix A. Construction of research fit
    12. References
Show full outline
Figures (4)
    1. 
    2. 
    3. 
    4. 
Tables (8)
    1. Table 1
    2. Table 2
    3. Table 3
    4. Table 4
    5. Table 5
    6. Table 6
Show all tables
JavaScript is disabled on your browser. Please enable JavaScript to use all the features on this page.

Research Policy
Volume 44, Issue 6, July 2015, Pages 1145-1159

Project selection in NIH: A natural experiment from ARRA

Author links open overlay panelHyunwooParkaJeongsik (Jay)LeebByung-CheolKimc
Show more
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.03.004Get rights and content


Highlights
•
We examine NIH preference in project selection using a natural experiment from ARRA.
•
Unexpected funding increases additionally supported some previous unfunded projects.
•
We compare their output with that of projects supported through regular NIH grants.
•
Regular projects had higher quality, greater variance, better fit with funding goal.
•
Our finding counters criticism that NIH is too risk averse and favors experienced PIs.
Abstract
Using a natural experiment in research funding by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) following the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009, we study the NIH's revealed preference in project selection. We do so by comparing the characteristics of the projects additionally selected for funding due to an unexpected increase in resources under the ARRA with those supported through regular NIH budget. We find that the regular-funded projects are on average of higher quality, as measured by the number of publications per project and the impact of these publications, than ARRA-funded projects. Moreover, compared to ARRA projects, regular projects are more likely to produce highest-impact articles and exhibit greater variance in research output. The output from regular projects also seems more closely fitting the purpose of funding. The differences in project quality are largely explained by observable attributes of the projects and research teams, suggesting that the NIH may use these attributes as cues for discerning underlying project quality. In addition, ARRA projects are more likely than regular projects to involve investigators with past grant experience. Many of these inter-group differences are specific to R01 grants, the largest funding category in the NIH. Overall, these results suggest that the NIH's project selection appears generally in line with its purported mission. In particular, our results contrast starkly with the frequent criticism that the NIH is extremely risk-averse and unwarrantedly favors experienced investigators. We discuss the implications of our findings on the NIH's behavior in project selection.
    • Previous article in issue
    • Next article in issue
JEL classification
D2
H0
H5
O3
Keywords
Public research funding
Project selection
Natural experiment
National Institutes of Health
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
Revealed preference
Recommended articlesCiting articles (5)
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
            ▪ Project selection: Commitment and competition
      Games and Economic Behavior, Volume 96, 2016, pp. 30-48
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ Extramural research grants and scientists’ funding strategies: Beggars cannot be choosers?
      Research Policy, Volume 41, Issue 8, 2012, pp. 1448-1460
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ Funding model and creativity in science: Competitive versus block funding and status contingency effects
      Research Policy, Volume 47, Issue 6, 2018, pp. 1070-1083
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
12Next
Citing articles (5)
            ▪ Assessment of techno-entrepreneurship projects by using Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP)
      2018, Technology in Society
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ Funding model and creativity in science: Competitive versus block funding and status contingency effects
      2018, Research Policy
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ The funding factor: a cross-disciplinary examination of the association between research funding and citation impact
      2018, Scientometrics
      View details
      
View more articles
Article Metrics
View article metrics
About ScienceDirectRemote accessShopping cartContact and supportTerms and conditionsPrivacy policy
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.
 

