 Skip to main content 

Journals & BooksRegisterSign in
    • 
    • Journals & Books
    • Register
    • Sign InHelp
 
Outline

Get AccessGet Access


Export
Advanced
Outline
    1. Highlights
    2. Abstract
    3. Keywords
    4. 1. Introduction
    5. 2. Related work
    6. 3. Content-based query refinement
    7. 4. Dataset and evaluation methods
    8. 5. Experimental results
    9. 6. Conclusion
    10. Acknowledgments
    11. Appendix A. Transcript of a conversation fragment from the AMI meeting corpus
    12. References
    13. Vitae
Show full outline
Figures (7)
    1. 
    2. 
    3. 
    4. 
    5. 
    6. 
Show all figures
Tables (3)
    1. Table 1
    2. Table 2
    3. Table 3
JavaScript is disabled on your browser. Please enable JavaScript to use all the features on this page.

Data & Knowledge Engineering
Volume 106, November 2016, Pages 38-51

Question answering in conversations: Query refinement using contextual and semantic information

Author links open overlay panelMaryamHabibia1ParvazMahdabibAndreiPopescu-Belisb
Show more
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.datak.2016.06.003Get rights and content

Highlights
•
This paper introduces a query refinement method applied to questions asked by users during a meeting.
•
To answer the questions, our method leverages the local context with external semantic resources, either WordNet or word embeddings.
•
The method first represents the local context by extracting keywords from the transcript of the conversation.
•
The proposed method then expands the queries with keywords that best represent the topic of the query.
•
We compare our query expansion approach, showing its superiority when manual or automatic transcripts are used.
Abstract
This paper introduces a query refinement method applied to questions asked by users to a system during a meeting or a conversation that they have with other users. To answer the questions, the proposed method leverages the local context of the conversation along with semantic resources, either WordNet or word embeddings from word2vec. The method first represents the local context by extracting keywords from the transcript of the conversation, which is obtained from a real-time Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) system and may contain noise. It then expands the queries with keywords that best represent the topic of the query, i.e. expansion keywords accompanied by weights indicating their topical similarity to the query. Finally, semantically related terms are added, using two options: either synonymous terms drawn from WordNet or similar words based on distributed representations in a low-dimensional word embedding space learned using word2vec. To evaluate the system, we introduce a dataset (named AREX for AMI Requests for Explanations) and an evaluation metric based on relevance judgments collected by crowdsourcing. We compare our query expansion approach with other methods, over queries from the AREX dataset, showing the superiority of our method when either manual or automatic transcripts of the AMI Meeting Corpus are used.
    • Previous article in issue
    • Next article in issue
Keywords
Query refinement
Query expansion
Context modeling
Speech-based information retrieval
Evaluation of information retrieval
Recommended articlesCiting articles (3)

Maryam Habibi received a B.Sc. degree in computer engineering in 2008, and a M.Sc. degree in computer engineering (artificial intelligence) in 2010 both from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran. She received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland in 2015. She is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the Laboratory of Knowledge Management in Bioinformatics (WBI), Humboldt-Universität, Berlin, Germany. Previously, she was a research assistant at the Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland. Her current research activities and interests include Natural Language Processing (NLP), especially Information Extraction from different sorts of texts.

Parvaz Mahdabi is currently a postdoctoral researcher at Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland where she is a member of the NLP group. She received her PhD in computer science from University of Lugano, Switzerland where she was a member of the information retrieval group. She obtained her MSc in Software Engineering from Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran. Before that, she received her BSc in Software Engineering from Tarbiat Moallem University of Tehran. Her research interests include information retrieval and Natural Language Processing with emphasis on document representation and content analysis, query modeling, and ranking.

Andrei Popescu-Belis graduated from the École Polytechnique (Paris, France) in 1995, with majors in mathematics and computer science. He received the MS in artificial intelligence from the University of Paris VI in 1996, and the PhD in computer science and natural language processing from LIMSI-CNRS, University of Paris XI, in 1999. He is currently a Senior Researcher at the Idiap Research Institute (Martigny, Switzerland), a Lecturer at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), and the head of Idiap's NLP group. He has been a Postdoc at UCSD and a Senior Research Assistant at ISSCO, University of Geneva. Dr. Popescu-Belis has over 120 peer-reviewed publications in human language technology, information retrieval, and multimodal interactive systems, including two edited books. He has been involved in several large Swiss and international research projects.
1
Work performed while at the Idiap Research Institute.
© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
            ▪ Matching parse thickets for open domain question answering
      Data & Knowledge Engineering, Volume 107, 2017, pp. 24-50
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ A study about the future evaluation of Question-Answering systems
      Knowledge-Based Systems, Volume 137, 2017, pp. 83-93
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ Pragmatic question answering: A game-theoretic approach
      Data & Knowledge Engineering, Volume 106, 2016, pp. 52-69
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
12Next
Citing articles (3)
            ▪ A Wikipedia powered state-based approach to automatic search query enhancement
      2018, Information Processing and Management
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ A closed-domain question answering framework using reliable resources to assist students
      2018, Natural Language Engineering
      View details
      
            ▪ A comparison of automatic search qery enhancement algorithms that utilise Wikipedia as a source of a priori knowledge
      2017, ACM International Conference Proceeding Series
      View details
      
Article Metrics
View article metrics
About ScienceDirectRemote accessShopping cartContact and supportTerms and conditionsPrivacy policy
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.
 

