 Skip to main content 

Journals & BooksRegisterSign in
    • 
    • Journals & Books
    • Register
    • Sign InHelp
 
Outline

Get AccessGet Access


Export
Advanced
Outline
    1. Highlights
    2. Abstract
    3. Keywords
    4. 1. Introduction
    5. 2. Related work
    6. 3. Methodology
    7. 4. Evaluation results
    8. 5. Result analysis and future work
    9. References
Show full outline
Figures (5)
    1. 
    2. 
    3. 
    4. 
    5. 
Tables (5)
    1. Table 1
    2. Table 2
    3. Table 3
    4. Table 4
    5. Table 5
JavaScript is disabled on your browser. Please enable JavaScript to use all the features on this page.

Expert Systems with Applications
Volume 42, Issues 17–18, October 2015, Pages 6306-6314

Open Directory Project based universal taxonomy for Personalization of Online (Re)sources

Author links open overlay panelJuricaŠevaMarkusSchattenPetraGrd
Show more
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2015.04.033Get rights and content

Highlights
•
We examine the overall quality of Open Directory Project as a classifier.
•
We compare several data grouping schemes and evaluate each of them.
•
We show that ODP can be used both as a horizontal as well as vertical classifier.
•
GENERAL grouping scheme yields best results for horizontal classification.
•
Number of documents (limit models) yield best results for vertical classification.
Abstract
Content personalization reflects the ability of content classification into (predefined) thematic units or information domains. Content nodes in a single thematic unit are related to a greater or lesser extent. An existing connection between two available content nodes assumes that the user will be interested in both resources (but not necessarily to the same extent). Such a connection (and its value) can be established through the process of automatic content classification and labeling. One approach for the classification of content nodes is the use of a predefined classification taxonomy. With the help of such classification taxonomy it is possible to automatically classify and label existing content nodes as well as create additional descriptors for future use in content personalization and recommendation systems. For these purposes existing web directories can be used in creating a universal, purely content based, classification taxonomy. This work analyzes Open Directory Project (ODP) web directory and proposes a novel use of its structure and content as the basis for such a classification taxonomy. The goal of a unified classification taxonomy is to allow for content personalization from heterogeneous sources. In this work we focus on the overall quality of ODP as the basis for such a classification taxonomy and the use of its hierarchical structure for automatic labeling. Due to the structure of data in ODP different grouping schemes are devised and tested to find the optimal content and structure combination for a proposed classification taxonomy as well as automatic labeling processes. The results provide an in-depth analysis of ODP and ODP based content classification and automatic labeling models. Although the use of ODP is well documented, this question has not been answered to date.
    • Previous article in issue
    • Next article in issue
Keywords
Recommendation systems
Content personalization
Automatic content classification
Automatic content labeling
Information extraction
Information retrieval
Open Directory Project
Vector Space Modeling
TF-IDF
Recommended articlesCiting articles (1)
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
            ▪ Hybrid methods for fuzzy clustering based on fuzzy c-means and improved particle swarm optimization
      Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 42, Issues 17–18, 2015, pp. 6315-6328
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ Correcting flawed expert knowledge through reinforcement learning
      Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 42, Issues 17–18, 2015, pp. 6457-6471
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ The Concept of Hayeks Machine for the Control of the Robot Khepera IV
      Procedia Earth and Planetary Science, Volume 15, 2015, pp. 878-885
      Download PDFView details
      
12Next
Citing articles (1)
            ▪ Novel artificial bee colony based feature selection method for filtering redundant information
      2018, Applied Intelligence
      View details
      
Article Metrics
View article metrics
About ScienceDirectRemote accessShopping cartContact and supportTerms and conditionsPrivacy policy
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.
 

