 Skip to main content 

Journals & BooksRegisterSign in
    • 
    • Journals & Books
    • Register
    • Sign InHelp
 
Outline

Get AccessGet Access


Export
Advanced
Outline
    1. Highlights
    2. Abstract
    3. Keywords
    4. 1. Introduction
    5. 2. Motivation: Traffic incident management
    6. 3. Literature review
    7. 4. Topic modeling
    8. 5. Data
    9. 6. Prediction models
    10. 7. Conclusions and future work
    11. Acknowledgments
    12. Appendix A. 
    13. References
Show full outline
Figures (9)
    1. 
    2. 
    3. 
    4. 
    5. 
    6. 
Show all figures
Tables (8)
    1. Table
    2. Table
    3. Table
    4. Table 1
    5. Table 2
    6. Table 3
Show all tables
JavaScript is disabled on your browser. Please enable JavaScript to use all the features on this page.

Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies
Volume 37, December 2013, Pages 177-192

Text analysis in incident duration prediction

Author links open overlay panelFrancisco C.PereiraFilipeRodriguesMosheBen-Akiva
Show more
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2013.10.002Get rights and content

Highlights
•
Incident duration prediction models so far either ignore or deal lightly with incident record messages.
•
We apply Topic Modeling techniques to convert textual information from real-time incident reports into predictive attributes.
•
We apply Topic Modeling techniques to convert textual information from real-time incident reports into predictive attributes.
•
Results show that models with text analysis consistently outperform those without such feature, decreasing the error by 28%.
•
Same technique applies to other contexts where information is available in textual form (e.g. special events websites).
Abstract
Due to the heterogeneous case-by-case nature of traffic incidents, plenty of relevant information is recorded in free flow text fields instead of constrained value fields. As a result, such text components enclose considerable richness that is invaluable for incident analysis, modeling and prediction. However, the difficulty to formally interpret such data has led to minimal consideration in previous work.
In this paper, we focus on the task of incident duration prediction, more specifically on predicting clearance time, the period between incident reporting and road clearance. An accurate prediction will help traffic operators implement appropriate mitigation measures and better inform drivers about expected road blockage time.
The key contribution is the introduction of topic modeling, a text analysis technique, as a tool for extracting information from incident reports in real time. We analyze a dataset of 2 years of accident cases and develop a machine learning based duration prediction model that integrates textual with non-textual features. To demonstrate the value of the approach, we compare predictions with and without text analysis using several different prediction models. Models using textual features consistently outperform the others in nearly all circumstances, presenting errors up to 28% lower than models without such information.
    • Previous article in issue
    • Next article in issue
Keywords
Incident duration prediction
Text analysis
Topic modeling
Regression models
Recommended articlesCiting articles (26)
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
            ▪ Competing risk mixture model and text analysis for sequential incident duration prediction
      Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, Volume 54, 2015, pp. 74-85
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ A combined M5P tree and hazard-based duration model for predicting urban freeway traffic accident durations
      Accident Analysis & Prevention, Volume 91, 2016, pp. 114-126
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ Competing risks mixture model for traffic incident duration prediction
      Accident Analysis & Prevention, Volume 75, 2015, pp. 192-201
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
12Next
Citing articles (26)
            ▪ Understanding the effects of trip patterns on spatially aggregated crashes with large-scale taxi GPS data
      2018, Accident Analysis and Prevention
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ Using structural topic modeling to identify latent topics and trends in aviation incident reports
      2018, Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ Jointly analyzing freeway traffic incident clearance and response time using a copula-based approach
      2018, Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
View more articles
Article Metrics

Captures
    • Exports-Saves: 1
    • Readers: 68
Citations
    • Citation Indexes: 26

View details
About ScienceDirectRemote accessShopping cartContact and supportTerms and conditionsPrivacy policy
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.

