 Skip to main content 

Journals & BooksRegisterSign in
    • 
    • Journals & Books
    • Register
    • Sign InHelp
 
Outline

Get AccessGet Access


Export
Advanced
Outline
    1. Highlights
    2. Abstract
    3. Keywords
    4. 1. Introduction
    5. 2. Research motivations
    6. 3. Related work
    7. 4. Research methodology
    8. 5. Experimentation and results
    9. 6. Conclusion and future work
    10. Acknowledgements
    11. References
    12. Vitae
Show full outline
Figures (2)
    1. 
    2. 
Tables (3)
    1. Table 1
    2. Table 2
    3. Table 3
JavaScript is disabled on your browser. Please enable JavaScript to use all the features on this page.

Journal of Computational Science
Volume 27, July 2018, Pages 386-393

Deep Recurrent neural network vs. support vector machine for aspect-based sentiment analysis of Arabic hotels’ reviews

Author links open overlay panelMohammadAl-SmadiaOmarQawasmehbMahmoudAl-AyyoubaYaserJararwehaBrijGuptac
Show more
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2017.11.006Get rights and content

Highlights
•
In this research, state-of-the-art approaches based on supervised machine learning are presented to tackle aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) challenges of Arabic Hotels’ reviews.
•
Two approaches of deep recurrent neural network (RNN) and support vector machine (SVM) are implemented and trained along with lexical, word, syntactic, morphological, and semantic features.
•
The proposed approaches are evaluated using a reference dataset of Arabic Hotels’ reviews annotated using an ABSA framework presented in the Semantic Evaluation workshop 2016 (SemEval-ABSA16).
•
Evaluation results show that the SVM approach outperforms the other deep RNN approach in the research investigated tasks (T1: aspect category identification (E#A allocation), T2: aspect opinion target expression (OTE) extraction, and T3: aspect sentiment polarity identification).
•
Whereas, when focusing on the execution time required for training and testing the models, the deep RNN was faster especially for the second task.
Abstract
In this research, state-of-the-art approaches based on supervised machine learning are presented to address the challenges of aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) of Arabic Hotels’ reviews. Two approaches of deep recurrent neural network (RNN) and support vector machine (SVM) are implemented and trained along with lexical, word, syntactic, morphological, and semantic features. The proposed approaches are evaluated using a reference dataset of Arabic Hotels’ reviews. Evaluation results show that the SVM approach outperforms the other deep RNN approach in the research investigated tasks (T1: aspect category identification, T2: aspect opinion target expression (OTE) extraction, and T3: aspect sentiment polarity identification). Whereas, when focusing on the execution time required for training and testing the models, the deep RNN execution time was faster, especially for the second task.
    • Previous article in issue
    • Next article in issue
Keywords
Aspect-based sentiment analysis
Supervised machine learning
Arabic reviews
Deep learning
Recommended articlesCiting articles (2)

Mohammad AL-Smadi received his Ph.D. in Computer Science from Graz University of Technology in 2012. He is currently an assistant Professor at Jordan University of Science and Technology, Computer Science department. He has co-authored several technical papers in established journals and conferences in fields related to Social and Semantic Computing, Knowledge Engineering, Natural Language Processing, Technology Enhanced Learning. He is co-chairing many IEEE events such as OSNT, SNAMS, BDSN, iLearn, and many others. http://www.just.edu.jo/maalsmadi9/.

Omar Qawasmeh is a PhD student at Jean Monnet University of Lyon France. He is currently a member of Connected Intelligence group at Hubert Curien laboratory. His research interest include: Natural Language Processing, Data Mining and Semantic Web.

Mahmoud Al-Ayyoub received his B.S. degree in Computer Science (CS) from the Jordan University of Science and Technology (JUST), Irbid, Jordan, in 2004. He received his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in CS also from the State University of New York at Stony Brook (SUNY@SB), Stony Brook, NY, USA, in 2006 and 2010, respectively. He is currently an associate professor and an acting department chairperson at the Computer Science Department of JUST. His research interests include artificial intelligence, natural language processing, and distributed systems.

Yaser Jararweh received his Ph.D. in Computer Engineering from University of Arizona in 2010. He is currently an associate professor of Computer Science at Jordan University of Science and Technology, Jordan. He has co-authored about seventy technical papers in established journals and conferences in fields related to cloud computing, HPC, SDN and Big Data. He was one of the TPC Co-Chair, IEEE Globecom 2013 International Workshop on Cloud Computing Systems, and Networks, and Applications (CCSNA). He is a steering committee member for CCSNA 2014 and CCSNA 2015 with ICC. He is the General Co-Chair in IEEE International Workshop on Software Defined Systems SDS-2014 and SDS 2015. He is also chairing many IEEE events such as ICICS, SNAMS, BDSN, IoTSMS and many others. Dr. Jararweh served as a guest editor for many special issues in different established journals. Also, he is the steering committee chair of the IBM Cloud Academy Conference. He is associate editor in the Cluster Computing Journal (Springer), Information Processing & Management (Elsevier) and others.

B. B. Gupta received PhD degree from Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India in the area of Information and Cyber Security. In 2009, he was selected for Canadian Commonwealth Scholarship and awarded by Government of Canada Award ($10,000). He spent more than six months in University of Saskatchewan (UofS), Canada to complete a portion of his research work. Dr. Gupta has excellent academic record throughout his carrier, was among the college toppers, during Bachelor's degree and awarded merit scholarship for his excellent performance. In addition, he was also awarded Fellowship from Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), Government of India to carry his Doctoral research work. He has published more than 70 research papers (including 01 book and 08 chapters) in International Journals and Conferences of high repute including IEEE, Elsevier, ACM, Springer, Wiley Inderscience, etc. He has visited several countries, i.e. Canada, Japan, Malaysia, Hong-Kong, etc to present his research work. His biography was selected and publishes in the 30th Edition of Marquis Who's Who in the World, 2012. He is also working principal investigator of various R&D projects. He is also serving as reviewer for Journals of IEEE, Springer, Wiley, Taylor & Francis, etc. Currently he is guiding 08 students for their Master's and Doctoral research work in the area of Information and Cyber Security. He also served as Organizing Chair of Special Session on Recent Advancements in Cyber Security (SS-CBS) in IEEE Global Conference on Consumer Electronics (GCCE), Japan in 2014 and 2015. Earlier he served as co-convener of National Conference on Emerging Trends in Engineering, Science Technology & Management (ETESTM-12), India, April, 2012. In addition, Dr Gupta received Best Poster presentation award and People choice award for Poster presentation in CSPC-2014, Aug., 2014, Malaysia. He served as Jury in All IEEE-R10 Young Engineers’ Humanitarian Challenge (AIYEHUM-2014), 2014. He has also served as founder and organizing chair of International Workshop on Future Information Security, Privacy and Forensics for Complex Systems (FISP-2015) in conjunction with ACM International Conference on Computing Frontiers (CF-2015), Ischia, Italy in May 2015. He is also serving as guest editor of various Journals.
© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
            ▪ Feature selection and ensemble construction: A two-step method for aspect based sentiment analysis
      Knowledge-Based Systems, Volume 125, 2017, pp. 116-135
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ Learning multiple layers of knowledge representation for aspect based sentiment analysis
      Data & Knowledge Engineering, Volume 114, 2018, pp. 26-39
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ W2VLDA: Almost unsupervised system for Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis
      Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 91, 2018, pp. 127-137
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
12Next
Citing articles (2)
            ▪ A comprehensive survey of arabic sentiment analysis
      2018, Information Processing and Management
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
            ▪ Special issue—Computational and algorithmic finance
      2018, Journal of Computational Science
      Purchase PDF
      View details
      
Article Metrics
View article metrics
About ScienceDirectRemote accessShopping cartContact and supportTerms and conditionsPrivacy policy
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.
 

