https://doi.org/10.1177/1750481318766936
Discourse & Communication
2018, Vol. 12(5) 517 –534
© The Author(s) 2018
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/1750481318766936
journals.sagepub.com/home/dcm
A ghost in the machine: 
Tracing the role of ‘the digital’ 
in discursive processes of 
cybervictimisation
Simon Lindgren
Umeå University, Sweden
Abstract
The study of discursive understandings of cybervictimisation draws on a dataset of crime news 
reporting and asks the question of if and how cybervictimisation is construed in ways that 
differ from other types of (non-digital) victimisation. Building on a critical discourse perspective 
employing corpus-based text analysis methods, the composition of news discourses about 
cybervictimisation are analysed, alongside the relationship between such representations and 
news media discourse on crime victimisation generally. The aim is to see what effect the presence 
of a digital dimension has for how the notion of victimisation is socially and culturally understood. 
The study shows, first, that news reporting on cybervictimisation has a strong bias towards 
crimes that fit well with the notion of ‘the ideal victim’ (such as sexual victimisation and bullying) 
while excluding other types like hacking and identity theft. The question is raised whether ‘victim’ 
discourse is able to account for the latter types or if new understandings and concepts will 
emerge. Second, the study shows that discourses promoting understandings of technology as 
contributing to amplifying danger, and that represent technology as potentially undermining social 
order, are strong in cybervictimisation news reports. These discourses are consequential for 
who is seen as a legitimate victim and not. Just as it can be very difficult to identify and apprehend 
perpetrators of cybercrime, so is also the identification and definition of cybervictims ambiguous 
and demands to be further researched.
Keywords
Internet, victimisation, topic modelling, CDS
Corresponding author:
Simon Lindgren, Department of Sociology, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden. 
Email: simon.lindgren@umu.se
766936
DCM
0010.1177/1750481318766936Discourse & Communication
Lindgren
research-article
2018
Article
518 
Discourse & Communication 12(5)
The focus of this study is on discursive understandings of cybervictimisation. Drawing 
on a dataset of crime news reporting, it asks the overarching question of if and how 
cybervictimisation, in such public discourse, is construed in ways that differ from other 
types of victimisation that does not have an obvious digital connection. Drawing on a 
critical discourse perspective in combination with corpus-based text analysis methods, 
this study analyses how news discourses about cybervictimisation are composed, as well 
as the relationship between such representations and more well-established news media 
discourse on crime victimisation generally. The aim is to see what effect the presence of 
a digital dimension has for how the notion of victimisation is socially and culturally 
understood.
Victim identities as socio-cultural constructs
The field of victimology is quite strongly rooted in discursive and social constructionist 
thinking about victims and victimisation. Even though substantial research addresses the 
status of being a victim as firmly set and unambiguous, and the process of victimisation as 
following unequivocally and universally from the commitment of given types of crimes, 
the field owes much to sociologist Nils Christie’s (1986) seminal paper on the ideal victim. 
With that paper, Christie defined a stereotype, conforming to which he saw as making it the 
most likely to lead to someone having complete and unambiguous victim status conferred 
on them. In sum, he argued that it is more likely to be seen as a legitimate victim if one is 
weak in relation to the offender and if one has acted responsibly but has still been subjected 
to crime. The takeaway point here is that the degree to which an individual converges with 
the ideal image will have an effect on the degree to which she is likely to be seen, by the 
judicial system, by the media and by the surrounding society more generally, as a ‘true’ 
victim worthy of compassion, restitution, compensation and rehabilitation.
We know however, that this idealised image of the victim does not align very well 
with empirical reality. Rather, as regards, for example, violent crime, men – who are 
discursively more likely than women to be understood as perpetrators – are known to be 
much more likely than women to be victimised (Wilson and Daly, 1985). Furthermore, 
the elderly of both sexes – in spite of aligning closely in some ways with the ideal victim 
stereotype – are among the least likely to be targeted (Dignan, 2004: 18). These examples 
relate to violent crime, but it is also worth noting that many crimes where the empirical 
reality may further challenge the notion of the ideal victim are seldom even included in 
victim surveys. Such crimes include so-called victimless offences (e.g. speeding and 
many regulatory offences), crimes where victims are complicit (such as prostitution and 
some offences involving abuse of drugs or alcohol), as well as many crimes committed 
through or in relation to the Internet – the latter, then, being the focus of this article. 
Crimes committed online further complicate conventional ideas of victimisation as the 
ideas formulated in routine activity theory (Cohen and Felson, 1979) – that people can 
choose whether they become victims or not simply by avoiding risky situations, such as 
going out alone late at night – no longer work. As online and offline worlds become 
increasingly interconnected, activities in one realm will get consequences in the other 
(Van Wilsem, 2011: 116).
Lindgren 
519
For any social problem, for example, that of victimisation of a certain type of 
offence, there is on one hand the individual experiences of any people involved. This 
is a reality which is personal, subjective and experiential (Loseke, 1987: 230). On the 
other hand, the problem is also discursively – officially and socially – constructed and 
constituted as a set reality which encompasses specified acts and actors. This reality, 
on its part, is formal, typified and ‘objective’. This article is interested in the latter 
form of symbolic constructions in relation to victimisation in online settings or what 
can be called cybervictimisation.
Cybercrime and its victims
The notion of ‘cybercrime’ (Gillespie, 2015; Wall, 2007) has been used to name crime 
which is committed using computer technology (Brenner, 2012: 8). Much cybercrime is 
simply the result of old-school ‘real-world’ crime migrating into the online sphere of the 
Internet and digital media. In these cases, the use of digital technologies does not funda-
mentally alter the offence at issue. It can be argued, for example, that fraud is fraud, no 
matter if it happens online or offline. At the same time, the case could be made that the 
specific affordances of digital communication through mobile devices and the Internet, 
alongside the resourceful ways in which people sometimes use them, contribute to 
enhancing, amplifying or even transforming prevailing social patterns (Lindgren, 2017: 
289–298).
Some think however that the talk of cybercrime is simply a case of ‘old wine in new 
bottles’. Grabosky (2001: 243) argues that even though the technology used – as well as 
its efficiency – may be without precedent, it might still be the case that we are dealing 
with recognisable crimes that are committed in new ways. So while the crimes may be 
digitally enhanced, in terms of, for example, the variety and number of opportunities, 
alongside their speed and transnational implications, the motives and repercussions may 
still be very familiar. Grabosky (2001) writes,
One hears anecdotes about children who have been lured from the safety of their homes by 
paedophiles after an initial encounter in an internet chatroom, or women who, after an 
electronically arranged assignation, meet with foul play at the hands of a predator. But is this 
really new? Cyberspace serves the same function as the busstop, the schoolyard or the disco. 
(p. 244)
Gordon and Ford (2006) make a distinction between cybercrime and computer crime. 
The latter refers to crimes, such as hacking, that revolve around using, as well as target-
ing, software and the Internet. Cybercrime, on the contrary, refers to pre-digital crimes 
committed with the help of computers and the Internet, such as fraud, theft and violent 
threats. As debates on hacktivism as well as digital piracy have shown however, this 
distinction is often hard to draw in practice (Lindgren, 2013; Lindgren and Linde, 2012; 
Lindgren and Lundström, 2011). Ultimately it comes down to whether the crimes have 
actual persons as victims or not, and, through layers of complex mediation, this is seldom 
clear-cut.
520 
Discourse & Communication 12(5)
Analysing vocabularies of victimisation
This overarching question is approached from the perspective of what sociologist Jennifer 
Dunn (2010) has written about in terms of ‘vocabularies of victimisation’. Keeping with 
the social constructionist perspective of Christie’s theory about the ideal victim, Dunn’s 
focus is on how victims, as well as those around them, must account for victimisation by 
putting together a certain type of stories about their motives, actions, experiences and 
reactions in order to be able to pass as legitimate victims. Such accounts must be produced 
in a number of different realms, such as in interactions between individuals, in mediatised 
and popular images of victims, as well as in how victim movements and activists frame 
their collective identities. Dunn points to the importance of studying the ‘vocabularies of 
victimisation’ that are then discursively established, used and maintained.
Dunn draws here on the notion of ‘vocabularies’ as defined by C. Wright Mills (1940) 
who argued that people ‘discern situations with particular vocabularies, and it is in terms 
of some delimited vocabulary that they anticipate consequences of conduct’ (p. 906). The 
vocabularies that we use to make sense of, and talk about, a particular situation, phenom-
enon or identity are connected to how ‘societal controls operate’ and are justifications 
and determinants for ‘certain lines of conduct’ (Mills, 1940: 906–908). This is quite 
synonymous to how many discourse analysts define the meaning of discourse – as 
Fairclough (2003) puts it,
Different discourses are different perspectives on the world, and they are associated with the 
different relations people have to the world, which in turn depends on their positions in the 
world, their social and personal identities, and the social relationships in which they stand to 
other people. Discourses not only represent the world as it is (or rather is seen to be), they are 
also projective, imaginaries, representing possible worlds which are different from the actual 
world, and tied in to projects to change the world in particular directions. (p. 124)
According to Dunn, the vocabularies (discourses) of victimisation comes into expres-
sion in three different settings. First, in the self-processes of victims, that is, in the pro-
cesses through which victims come to understand their own experiences and their own 
situations. Second, in the interactions between victims and the social world around them, 
that is, in the process where victim identities are interactionally constituted between, for 
example, victims and their family members, or victims and authorities when seeking 
assistance. Third – and this is the focus of the present study – in the public image of 
victims, that is, in the process where images of ‘typical’ victims are constructed through 
collective vocabularies or discourses. As Dunn (2010) writes, we must focus on ‘defini-
tional processes’ to help us to understand responses to victimisation: ‘Presently accepted 
vocabularies might not suffice, and we could explore how they are necessarily altered, 
abandoned, or broadened’ (p. 177).
Research questions and methodological framework
In terms of methodology, this study positions itself within the wider field of critical dis-
course studies (CDS), aiming to analyse the process by which social reality is ‘conceptu-
ally mediated’. It is about analysing how language use relates to the symbolic construction 
Lindgren 
521
of institutions, ideologies, power relations and identities (Fairclough, 2012: 9). The key 
point of discourse analysis in general is that language and social reality are mutually 
constitutive. We analyse discourses as semiotic ways of construing aspects of the physi-
cal, mental or social world. The discourses are consequences of the social settings in 
question and their participating actors. At the same time, these discourses produce con-
sequences for those same settings and actors. Language, rather than being a passive 
system, is a social practice ‘that is both determined by social structure and contributes to 
stabilizing and changing that structure simultaneously’ (Wodak and Meyer, 2016: 7).
As introduced earlier, the overarching aim of this study was to analyse the composi-
tion of news discourses about cybervictims and how such constructions relate to more 
common news media discourse about crime victims in general. Furthermore, the aim is 
to see how discourses about cybervictimisation can contribute to widening or changing 
some established understandings of what and who is a crime victim. Drawing on this 
aim, a set of research questions were formulated to guide the study. The research was 
guided by the following questions:
RQ1.
What are the central themes in news reporting about victims of crime (including 
victims of cybercrime)?
RQ2.
What similarities and differences are there within that thematic structure in 
terms of which themes relate to reporting on cybervictims as compared to reporting 
on victims of non-cybercrime?
RQ3.
How do the identified topical patterns contribute to articulating and framing 
contemporary discourses of victimisation?
CDS does not dictate any one specific research method. There has been a tendency in 
the field, however, towards a reliance on close readings and qualitative interpretations of 
the texts under analysis, with a focus on how their language use functions in constituting 
a certain form of social reality, through defining vocabularies, subject positions, and 
equivalences and differences. The motivation behind CDS is sometimes quite radical, as 
in the cases when it wants to expose ‘power abuse through discourse’, to ‘dissent against 
the symbolic power elites that dominate public discourse’ (Van Dijk, 2013) and to ‘pro-
duce knowledge which can lead to emancipatory change’ (Fairclough, 2003: 209). In 
other cases, CDS is focused on less dramatic or ‘serious’ topics, experiences and phe-
nomena, the fundamental idea being that ‘any social phenomenon lends itself to critical 
investigation, to be challenged and not taken for granted’ (Wodak and Meyer, 2016: 3). I 
see CDS as being about critically and systematically analysing language use and its 
social origins and consequences, and this can be achieved through a variety of specific 
explicit methods (cf. Van Dijk, 2013).
In light of that, this study makes use of the computational corpus linguistics method 
of topic modelling. Topic modelling, more generally, is a set of different probabilistic 
algorithms that aim to find the latent conceptual structure that a collection of texts is 
organised by. A topic model, then, takes the corpus as input and iteratively processes it to 
learn which topics it is made out of. Topics are understood as recurring themes that are 
discussed in the corpus. The method is unsupervised, meaning that topics are not decided 
522 
Discourse & Communication 12(5)
by the researcher beforehand. The model ‘algorithmically finds a way of representing 
documents that is useful for navigating and understanding the collection’ (Blei, 2012).
Combining CDS with such methods is not a novel idea as there has long been talk of 
research in the vein of corpus-assisted discourse studies (CADS; Baker, 2006; De 
Beaugrande, 1997; Hardt-Mautner, 1995; Stubbs, 1996; Subtirelu and Baker, 2017). In 
line with the argument of Baker et al. (2008), that none of the methods ‘need be subservi-
ent to the other (as the word “assisted” in CADS implies)’, this study sees CDS and topic 
modelling as contributing ‘equally and distinctly to a methodological synergy’ (p. 274). 
As a matter of fact, the creator of latent dirichlet allocation (LDA), David Blei (2012), 
sees his method as performing a kind of reverse engineering similar to that of discourse 
analysis:
Topic modeling algorithms perform what is called probabilistic inference. Given a collection of 
texts, they reverse the imaginary generative process to answer the question ‘What is the likely 
hidden topical structure that generated my observed documents?’
A discourse analyst, similarly, when approaching texts, asks what underlying dis-
courses may have generated the texts in question. Topic modelling, in this study, is used 
as a technique for extracting information from news articles to establish central themes 
that conceptually frame discourses about crime victims (Afful-Dadzie and Afful-Dadzie, 
2017: 666). More precisely, the wider interpretive framework of CDS aids in interpreting 
and contextualising the data (as in RQ3 above), while topic modelling contributes by 
enabling clustering of the data (as in RQ1 and RQ2 above).
Empirical procedure
The empirical procedure for addressing these questions can be described in terms of 
three different phases: (1) data collection and text pre-processing, (2) topic modelling 
and (3) interpretation and critical analysis.
Data collection and text pre-processing
Data for this study were collected from Retriever, which provides digitised versions of 
printed material from all major Swedish daily newspapers, regional newspapers, as well 
as hundreds of journals, magazines and periodicals (Mediearkivet (The Media Archive), 
2017). The corpus for this research was built through two strategically designed searches 
in all available sources in Retriever. One search was made for a set of terms relating to 
crimes, victims and victimisation, plus a set of terms relating to the Internet, social media 
and digital culture. The top 1500 articles, sorted by Retriever’s ‘relevance’ metric, were 
added to the corpus. Another search was made for the same crime, victim and victimisa-
tion terms, minus the set of Internet, social media and digital culture terms. The top 1500 
articles yielded by this search were also added to the corpus. The search terms used were 
iteratively tested in order to make sure that only such articles that were of interest for the 
study were included in the sample. This rendered a 3000 document corpus where half of 
the documents were tagged as ‘cyber’, the other half as ‘offline’.
Lindgren 
523
The phase of data collection was followed by a set of text cleaning procedures which 
were applied in order to transform the corpus documents into the appropriate format for 
further processing. Such operations were implemented in Python using relevant libraries, 
most prominently NLTK (Natural Language Toolkit) (Bird et al., 2009; Van Rossum, 
2007). The cleaning pipeline included lowercase conversion, whitespace stripping, 
removal of punctuation, filtering of stopwords (a generic Swedish list) and sparse terms, 
as well as excluding header, footer and metadata sections of the news articles that could 
unduly influence the outcome of the analysis. Stemming was applied using the Swedish 
version of the SnowballStemmer in NLTK.
Topic modelling
The next phase employed topic modelling through LDA, to identify common thematic 
categories and to map how they were distributed across the documents (Blei et al., 2003). 
This provided an overview and insight into the corpus that helped spot areas of interest 
for the following closer critical analysis (cf. Baker et al., 2008: 284).
LDA assumes, first, that there are a fixed number of topics by which a corpus can be 
described. Topics are defined as patterns or groups of terms that have a tendency to 
appear together in the documents. Second, it assumes that each document in the analysed 
collection exhibits the topics in different degrees. The result of an LDA is information 
about the topical structure: Which set of topics is likely to best describe the corpus? How 
are the topics distributed across documents?
The LDA analysis was performed using the gensim library for Python (Rehurek and 
Sojka, 2010) and its wrapper for MALLET (McCallum, 2002). The topic model was cre-
ated through running 1000 sampling iterations and instructing it to use 100 topics. The 
hyperparameter optimisation option in MALLET was used. Without such optimisation, 
it is assumed beforehand that topics will be quite symmetrically distributed, in the sense 
that they are expected to have about the same total allocation in the corpus. With optimi-
sation activated however, we push the model towards asymmetry in the sense that it 
allows for some topics to grow relatively large while others become relatively small 
(Wallach et al., 2009). For this present analysis, the optimisation interval was set at 10, 
meaning that optimisation happens every 10 iterations, which is MALLET’s suggested 
default setting. The smaller the interval, or the higher the number of iterations, optimisa-
tion will happen more times, and the more it happens, the stronger the topic probability 
distribution will deviate from a symmetric scenario.
Interpretation and critical analysis
While LDA assists in responding to RQ1 and RQ2, it is important to remember that the 
model in itself does not offer a finished analysis and interpretation of what the corpus 
says or means. Rather, as stated earlier, the model helps uncover patterns that must then 
be analysed further. It is in this next step of analysis that the wider interpretive frame-
work of CDS becomes important (cf. RQ3). While some statistical metrics can be calcu-
lated to validate the relevance and coherence of topic models, experimental research has 
shown that such measures tend to be vastly outperformed by evaluation through actual 
524 
Discourse & Communication 12(5)
human judgement (Chang et al., 2009). When it comes to the different configurations 
that can be made in order to arrive at a reasonable set of topics, it has been commonly 
suggested that ‘human-in-the-loop methods’ are recommendable (Lee et al., 2017: 
29–30).
Critical close reading and contextualised analysis of the texts makes it possible to go 
past the topic structure to discuss what the algorithmically extracted categories express 
in the social context that the analysed corpus was constructed to represent. Such analysis 
entails paying attention to intertextual, historical and political contexts that go way 
beyond the mere analysis of linguistic units. In this phase of the study, an analysis was 
made of similarities and differences between news discourse on cybervictims and other 
victims. This meant looking closer at discursive patterns such as exclusions, the level of 
abstraction and the representation of agency (Fairclough, 2003).
Themes in news reporting on crime victims
After the topic model was created, the 100 identified topics were reviewed and coded into 
categories. The identified categories generally fell within one of two types. Topics were 
either quite general, referring to generic aspects of some of the subject areas that perme-
ated the dataset, or rather specific, referring to victimisation to certain types of crimes. It 
is the latter kind of topics which are the most interesting for this study. It is worth, just 
briefly, to note that the two most prominent generic categories were ‘police/law/courts’ 
and ‘media’ (Figure 1). The latter of these two was chiefly composed of residual topics 
that were still remaining after the text pre-processing and that were reflecting meta-aspects 
of the news articles in question, such as mentioning newspaper section names, place-
holder headings and so on. The former – the ‘police/law/courts’ topics – referred to generic 
aspects of crime reporting with terms such as ‘police’, ‘lawyer’, ‘crime scene’, ‘verdict’, 
‘discovered’, ‘legislation’ and so on. The presence of such topics, while not in any way 
surprising in light of the data collection strategy, can be interpreted as a validation that the 
sample is in fact about such themes that we want it to contain.
Turning then to the first research question, concerning what the central themes are in 
news reporting about victims, of cybercrime and other crime, the analysis shows that 
newspaper articles about victimisation tend to favour certain crime types (Figure 1). 
First, topics dealing with school bullying and cyberbullying among young people, along-
side hate crimes and online hate speech, are very prominent in the corpus. It is important 
to note that this does not reflect proportions of victim depictions in news media in any 
general or unfiltered way. It must be remembered that the corpus for this study was stra-
tegically composed so that half of it would particularly reflect cybervictimisation. This, 
naturally, increases the weight of Internet related topics as compared to in a general 
corpus of crime or crime victim reporting. What we can note here, however, without 
making any direct size-wise comparison of categories, is that these types of crimes are 
indeed common topics. As we will see further on, some of these categories – hate crimes, 
for instance – while important in cybervictim articles, are even more prominent in the 
‘offline’ part of the corpus. Carried to a larger extent by that latter set of articles, a set of 
other victimisation types are also common in the dataset. Among these are harassment, 
political violence, domestic violence, drug violence and gang violence (Figure 1).
Lindgren 
525
This tells us that when there is talk of ‘victims’ and ‘victimisation’ in the analysed 
news articles, this tends to be about victims of certain types of crimes. These are violent 
crimes, crimes within families (men’s violence against women), hate crimes, harassment 
and bullying. In spite of the obvious match with the notion of the ideal victim, we do not 
see as much of children as victims. They occur only in a couple of very generic topics (7; 
40) that gather terms about children, parents and families, without any strong co-occur-
rence with victimisation or crime vocabulary. This may be due to ethical considerations 
on behalf of the police, courts, as well as editors and journalists. Furthermore, we do not 
find any palpable traces of victims to some of the most ‘cyber’ of cybercrimes such as 
identity theft, computer fraud and illicit hacking. This may have to do with the fact that 
such crimes fail to conform to the notion of an ideal victim – not in the least as some of 
these crimes lack any easily identifiable victimised individual in the conventional and 
familiar sense – and thereby do not fit the news media’s crime reporting logic of drama-
tisation, big bad wolves and little red riding hoods, and police and thieves.
Characterising cybervictim discourse
Closing in on the second research question, on the similarities and differences between 
reporting on cybervictims as compared to reporting on victims of non-cybercrime, an 
effort was made to focus only on the most prominent patterns in the topic-document 
matrix. In this case, this meant filtering the matrix, which was initially 100 topics by 
3000 documents, by looking at which documents had the highest entropy. Entropy is a 
measure of disorder in probability distributions, where the higher the entropy for a docu-
ment, the larger the number of topics its probability scores will be scattered across. 
Conversely, low entropy would mean that a document’s probability scores would be 
centred to one or few topics. The point here was to focus the analysis on documents with 
a high degree of topical activity, to get to know more about in what constellations discur-
sive themes appear in those cases where constellations are rather complex. Based on 
Figure 1. Categorisation of identified topics.
526 
Discourse & Communication 12(5)
entropy, calculated with ScipPy (Jones et al., 2001), the top 25 ‘cyber’ documents and the 
top 25 ‘offline’ documents were retained.
Within this new matrix (Figure 2), an analysis was then made to find topics with high 
and low differences, respectively, in topic shares between cybervictim reporting and 
other victim reporting. Differences were calculated for each topic by subtracting the 
average topic probability in ‘cyber’ documents from that in ‘offline’ documents. A posi-
tive result means that a topic is heavier on the ‘cyber’ side of the corpus, while a negative 
result indicates that a topic is more typical on the ‘offline’ side.
Looking closer at the middle third of Figure 2, it shows topic probabilities for a set of 
topics that stand out by the fact that they are very evenly distributed throughout both 
parts of the corpus. Here, once again, generic topics about policing, legal issues and 
proceedings, and criminal policy stand out. These are the things that the corpus as a 
whole is most generally about. As matching terms relating to crime victimisation was the 
sampling strategy, we obviously seem to have hit it right in the sense of having collected 
a corpus about the wider discursive context wherein such victimisation generally 
happens.
If we turn our attention to the bottom third of Figure 2, we find those topics that are 
most likely to come out in offline victimisation news reports, that is, such discursive 
themes that tend to be employed in news reports where the victimisation discussed is of 
a mostly non-cyber character. Rather expectedly, the strong topics here relate to ‘stand-
ard’ types of victimisation that align well with what we already know about cultural and 
social understandings of victims. The standout crime categories here are bullying, sexual 
assault, other violent crimes and murder, all examples of victimisation that discursively 
line up well with the notion of the ideal victim who is outnumbered, weak, attacked and 
overpowered. There is also an emphasis here on uses of victim discourse in relation to a 
set of other, conventionally newsworthy (Galtung and Ruge, 1965) topical areas such as 
white-collar crime, drugs and political violence.
The discursive perspective directs attention towards how language is used to define 
certain potentials and possibilities while excluding others (Fairclough, 2003: 24). 
Looking at the top third of the figure, there is a pattern by which certain types of crimes 
tend to be discussed in relation to cybervictimisation. These are not the most unambigu-
ous cybercrimes, such as phishing, hacking or identity theft, but largely a set of non-
digital crimes that tend to be articulated here in relation to cybervictimisation. A possible 
interpretation of this is that cybervictimisation as a discursive category does not include 
victims of such crimes. Once again returning to the notion of the ideal victim, the cyber-
crimes mentioned above lack any such victims. A first result of the analysis is thus that, 
rather than being a completely new breed of language use, cybervictim discourse seems 
to rest firmly on previously established understandings of victimisation. By consequence, 
news texts such as those analysed here can be seen to constrain policy options, as well as 
action possibilities, by portraying cybervictimisation in this quite narrow sense.
Discursive traits
In relation to the third research question, about how the identified patterns contribute to 
articulating 
and 
framing 
contemporary 
discourses 
of 
victimisation, 
the 
analytical 
Lindgren 
527
Figure 2. Topic probabilities for key topics in key documents (rows are key topics, columns are news articles, darker colours mean higher topic 
probability).
528 
Discourse & Communication 12(5)
strategy drew on CDS and its focus on identifying discourses in texts. Discourses are 
‘ways of representing the world which can be identified and differentiated at different 
levels of abstraction’, and texts ‘differ in the discourses they draw upon to represent 
particular aspects of the world’ while, they also ‘articulate different discourses together 
(hybridize or mix discourses) in various ways’ (Fairclough, 2003: 133). The goal with 
this part of the analysis was to identify discourses in the texts about cybervictimisation 
in order to map how what understanding of this type of victimisation they were project-
ing. Such understandings are realised through vocabulary, through what semantic rela-
tionships are set up and through classifications as well collocations, assumptions and 
different grammatical features (Fairclough, 2003: 193).
On the most general level of abstraction, looking once more at the top left part of 
Figure 2, the topics most strongly associated with cybervictimisation news reports give 
a first picture of the discursive framework. The idea of discourses implies a certain 
degree of repetition and commonality (Fairclough, 2003: 124), in the sense that dis-
courses are patterns that transcend local or individual representation. Anything which is 
expressed is not automatically ‘discourse’. The procedure by which we worked our way 
from the larger corpus and down to these topics indicates, however, that they indeed 
represent repeated patterns of language use.
The closer analysis of these patterns lead to some further findings. First, that cyber-
victimisation is discussed in the news reports in relation to a discourse of technology 
amplifying danger. This discourse comes into expression through the topics (66), (71), 
(68), (9), (83) and (67) in Figure 2. All these are in fact dealing with forms of victimisa-
tion that is not digital in themselves. Rather, these topics relate to types of crimes that are 
pre-digital, but they become discursively connected to cybervictimisation through a pro-
cess of ‘articulation’. This refers to the practice by which discursive relations between 
elements are established. A discourse, then, is the ‘structured totality resulting from the 
articulatory practice’ (Laclau and Mouffe, 2001: 105). As argued by Stuart Hall (1985), 
the links or connections made through articulation are not given ‘as a law or a fact of life’ 
(p. 113). Quite to the contrary, they must be discursively sustained and ‘can under some 
circumstances disappear or be overthrown, leading to the old linkages being dissolved 
and new connections – re-articulations – being forged’. Cybervictimisation in this case, 
then, is construed through a discourse that links digital technology to danger and which 
presents such technology as having the potential to amplify the risk and consequences of 
victimisation. In the news reports that map strongly to the topics mentioned above, 
examples of formulations are,
For vulnerable young girls, there is a risk that the Internet functions as a gateway into 
prostitution, according to a report. Under some circumstances, boundaries may become erased.
Dirty old men online is one of the dangers, but also internet drugs – which have created a 
number of tragedies.
Human compassion does not seem to exist in the context of online hate. Individuals and groups 
become targets for the trolls who greedily continue their hunt for the next victim in the digital 
world.
Lindgren 
529
A school principal says that there is some kind of underlying evil generally on the Internet. 
There is anonymity, which means that people think that they can behave however they like.
Social media have provided bullying with a new platform where it can easily escalate.
As Fairclough (2003) puts it, ‘social events can be represented at different levels of 
abstraction and generalization’, while there are also choices in how social actors are 
portrayed (p. 137). Social actors are sometimes clearly pointed out in the text, while they 
in other cases are backgrounded or suppressed. Such representational choices as regards 
abstraction and agency may have many reasons, but they may indeed be politically or 
socially significant. From a discursive perspective, there is a big difference between 
referring to transitive processes (‘someone killed X’) or intransitive ones (‘X lost their 
life’). In light of this, the article excerpts above are examples of how strategies of abstrac-
tion and activation contribute to the articulation of a discourse where the Internet and 
digital technology is symbolically constructed not as an arena for victimisation, but 
largely as a victimising force in itself.
The first excerpt invokes the ideal victim category of ‘vulnerable young girls’ and 
introduces the agents of ‘the Internet’ and ‘some circumstances’ as potentially usher-
ing the victims into prostitution while erasing boundaries. The second excerpt, while 
expressing the ideal offender category of ‘dirty old men’ as being a risk both online 
and 
offline, 
also 
invokes 
the 
actor 
‘Internet 
drugs’ 
as 
a 
potential 
perpetrator. 
Discursively then, no connection is made here to already established notions of ‘the 
drug problem’ or to ‘dealers’ and ‘users’. Suffixing ‘drugs’ with ‘Internet’ implies a 
different, more abstract, creature. As exemplified in the third excerpt, hate online is 
construed as functioning in different ways than hate offline, where abstract and 
ambiguous actors (‘trolls’) relentlessly hunt down regular people in ‘the digital 
world’, which is implied to function according to its own logic. The two concluding 
excerpts also illustrate invocations of an ‘evil Internet’ and ‘social media’ as enabling 
and providing for victimisation.
This, in turn is connected to a discourse of technology threatening social order. This 
especially comes to the fore in relation to topic 23 (texting/Internet/integrity) in Figure 2 
where – relatively – new phenomena such as Internet use and practices such as texting 
are employed as explanations for why victimisation may happen. Similar to what was 
discussed previously, the language use in these cases is marked by a high level of abstrac-
tion and of calling upon technological things in themselves as possessing a form of 
enchanted agency.
The expert agrees that online bullying is a problem: ‘You are helpless when to receive something 
of a vicious character over sms or on the internet’, she says.
The virtual world is becoming so powerful that it is challenging the real world, and social 
networks such as Facebook are mapping our lives down to very tiny detail.
Services like Google Buzz, Twitter, and Facebook makes it easy for burglars to know when 
someone is not at home.
530 
Discourse & Communication 12(5)
The reason for the heated atmosphere at the school was that an account posting pictures of 
young girls, alongside degrading comments, had been registered.
The things that, discursively speaking, cause things to happen in these examples are 
not bullies, Internet users, burglars or individuals posting degrading content. Rather, the 
language employed names as actors: ‘the virtual world’, ‘social networks such as 
Facebook’, ‘services like Google, Twitter and Facebook’ and ‘an account having been 
created’. If victimisation to similar crimes – but without the digital component – had 
been discussed, we would not expect a focus this strong on the mode of interaction but 
probably rather on its outcome.
A ghost in the machine?
Most famously, the phrase ‘ghost in the machine’ refers to British philosopher Gilbert 
Ryle’s description of René Descartes’ mind-body dualism (Ryle, 1949). In the con-
text of this study, however, the phrase suggests something else. It refers to the fact 
that in relation to new media, whichever they may have been throughout history, 
there is a tendency towards mystification. This study wants to problematise how 
such tendencies may specifically affect (cyber)victimisation discourse. We often see 
threatening or elusive ‘ghosts’ inside the ‘machine’ of media technologies. As 
McLuhan (1964) argued, ‘the new media of any period whatever [will be] classed as 
pseudo by those who have acquired the patterns of earlier media, whatever they may 
happen to be’ (p. 199).
The Internet and social media are no longer ‘new media’ in the sense that they are 
novel. They are still ‘new’, however, in the sense that we are still in an era where the new 
digitally networked media logic is continuously juxtaposed with the remnants of layered 
‘old media’ such as print, radio and television. Speaking in terms of more general media 
paradigms, and not of specific expressions of them, the Internet and social media are at 
least still the newest media that we have.
This study has shown that news reporting on cybervictimisation has a strong focus on 
certain types of crimes. Notwithstanding how ‘serious’ various types may be, this focus 
entails a bias towards crimes that fit well with the notion of ‘the ideal victim’ while 
excluding other types like hacking and identity theft. Such crimes do have victims how-
ever, and one might ask whether ‘victim’ discourse will be able to account for these or if 
new understandings and concepts will emerge. Furthermore, this study has shown that 
discourses that promote understandings of technology as contributing to amplifying dan-
ger, and that construe technology as potentially undermining social order, are strong in 
cybervictimisation reporting.
As with many other debates over media and risks throughout history, the discussion 
about cybervictimisation, not only as expressed through the data analysed here but also 
more generally, has been fraught with technological determinism (Smith and Marx, 1994) 
as well as with media panic (Drotner, 1999). Prefixes such as ‘cyber-’ have been added to 
things together with the uncritical assumption that social phenomena and interaction are 
crucially different from those previously referred in history if they come into expression 
through digital technology. Furthermore, the very newness of new media always tends to 
Lindgren 
531
lead to increased public concern alongside amplification, dramatisation and dispropor-
tionate assumptions about the intensity of the transformation and the level of risk associ-
ated with it (Cohen, 1972).
The conclusions drawn in this study based on the analysis of news reports are cor-
roborated by the perspective that comes to the fore in the 2010 cybercrime report 
published by antivirus software company Symantec. They write of cybercrime as ‘a 
silent global digital epidemic’ with ‘feelings of powerlessness and lack of justice felt 
by its victims worldwide’ (Symantec, 2010: 3). They also claimed that as many as 
65% of adults around the world had at one point or another been a victim of cyber-
crime, with 51% of these referring to viruses and malware attacks and the rest to 
online scams, phishing, identity theft, credit card frauds and harassment (Symantec, 
2010: 4). In addition, only 9% said they felt ‘very safe’ online, and as many as 79% 
did not expect that cybercriminals would be brought to justice (Symantec, 2010: 
7–8).
Whether such numbers may be overblown or not, the Internet has undoubtedly 
changed the parameters for how crime can be experienced. For example, some variants 
of digital communication are relatively anonymous, faceless and disembodied, which 
may have a distancing effect, but conversely also work to disinhibit people in their 
actions and reactions, thereby making them more intense (Suler, 2005). Furthermore, the 
potential scalability and virality of communication through the Internet – following from 
its ‘small world’ characteristics (Albert et al., 1999) – can impact on the magnitude of 
harm caused by cybercrime. These and other factors have an impact not only on how 
legislation must be adapted to address cybercrime and cybervictimisation adequately, 
and how such crimes must be investigated, but also on how new perpetrator identities 
(the hacker, the file-sharer, the troll, the cyber mob, the online bully etc.) alongside new 
victim identities emerge. Just as it can be very difficult to identify and apprehend perpe-
trators of cybercrime, so is also the identification and definition of cybervictims ambigu-
ous and demands to be further researched.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, 
and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/
or publication of this article: This research was supported by The Swedish Crime Victim
Compensation and Support Authority.
References
Afful-Dadzie E and Afful-Dadzie A (2017) Liberation of public data: Exploring central themes 
in open government data and freedom of information research. 
International Journal of 
Information Management
37(6): 664–672.
Albert R, Jeong H and Barabási A-L (1999) Diameter of the world-wide web. 
Nature
401(6749): 
130–131.
532 
Discourse & Communication 12(5)
Baker P (2006) 
Using Corpora in Discourse Analysis
. London: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Baker P, Gabrielatos C, KhosraviNik M, et al. (2008) A useful methodological synergy? Combining 
critical discourse analysis and corpus linguistics to examine discourses of refugees and asy-
lum seekers in the UK press. 
Discourse & Society
19(3): 273–306.
Bird S, Klein E and Loper E (2009) 
Natural Language Processing with Python
. Cambridge, MA: 
O’Reilly Media.
Blei DM (2012) Topic modeling and digital humanities. 
Journal of Digital Humanities
2(1): 
8–11.
Blei DM, Ng AY and Jordan MI (2003) Latent dirichlet allocation. 
Journal of Machine Learning 
Research
3: 993–1022.
Brenner SW (2012) 
Cybercrime and the Law: Challenges, Issues, and Outcomes
. Boston, MA: 
Northeastern University Press.
Chang J, Gerrish S, Wang C, et al. (2009) Reading tea leaves: How humans interpret topic mod-
els. In: Bengio Y, Schuurmans D, Lafferty JD, et al. (eds) 
Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 22
. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, pp. 288–296.
Christie N (1986) The ideal victim. In: Fattah EA (ed.) 
From Crime Policy to Victim Policy
. 
London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 17–30.
Cohen LE and Felson M (1979) Social change and crime rate trends: A routine activity approach. 
American Sociological Review
44(4): 588–608.
Cohen S (1972) 
Folk Devils and Moral Panics: The Creation of the Mods and Rockers
. London: 
MacGibbon & Kee.
De Beaugrande R (1997) 
New Foundations for a Science of Text and Discourse: Cognition, 
Communication, and the Freedom of Access to Knowledge and Society
. Norwood, NJ: 
Praeger.
Dignan J (2004) 
Understanding Victims & Restorative Justice
. Maidenhead: Open University 
Press.
Drotner K (1999) Dangerous media? Panic discourses and dilemmas of modernity. 
Paedagogica 
Historica
35(3): 593–619.
Dunn JL (2010) Vocabularies of victimization: Toward explaining the deviant victim. 
Deviant 
Behavior
31(2): 159–183.
Fairclough N (2003) 
Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research
. London: 
Routledge.
Fairclough N (2012) Critical discourse analysis. In: Gee JP and Handford M (eds) 
The Routledge 
Handbook of Discourse Analysis
. London: Routledge, pp. 9–20.
Galtung J and Ruge MH (1965) The structure of foreign news: The presentation of the Congo, 
Cuba and Cyprus crises in four Norwegian newspapers. 
Journal of Peace Research
2(1): 
64–90.
Gillespie AA (2015) 
Cybercrime: Key Issues and Debates
. Abingdon: Routledge.
Gordon S and Ford R (2006) On the definition and classification of cybercrime. 
Journal in 
Computer Virology
2(1): 13–20.
Grabosky PN (2001) Virtual criminality: Old wine in new bottles? 
Social & Legal Studies
10(2): 
243–249.
Hall S (1985) Signification, representation, ideology: Althusser and the post-structuralist debates. 
Critical Studies in Mass Communication
2(2): 91–114.
Hardt-Mautner G (1995) ‘Only connect’: Critical discourse analysis and corpus linguistics. 
UCREL Lancaster
. Available at: http://ucrel.lancaster.ac.uk/papers/techpaper/vol6.pdf
Jones E, Oliphant T and Peterson P (2001) SciPy: Open source scientific tools for Python. 
Available at: https://www.scipy.org/
Lindgren 
533
Laclau E and Mouffe C (2001) 
Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic 
Politics
. London: Verso Books.
Lee TY, Smith A, Seppi K, et al. (2017) The human touch: How non-expert users perceive, inter-
pret, and fix topic models. 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies
105: 28–42.
Lindgren S (2013) Pirate panics: Comparing news and blog discourse on illegal file sharing in 
Sweden. 
Information, Communication and Society
16(8): 1242–1265.
Lindgren S (2017) 
Digital Media and Society
. London: SAGE.
Lindgren S and Linde J (2012) The subpolitics of online piracy: A Swedish case study. 
Convergence
18(2): 143–164.
Lindgren S and Lundström R (2011) Pirate culture and hacktivist mobilization: The cultural and 
social protocols of #WikiLeaks on Twitter. 
New Media & Society
13(6): 999–1018.
Loseke DR (1987) Lived realities and the construction of social problems: The case of wife abuse. 
Symbolic Interaction
10(2): 229–243.
McCallum AK (2002) MALLET: A machine learning for language toolkit. Available at: http://
mallet.cs.umass.edu
McLuhan M (1964) 
Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man
. Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press.
Mediearkivet [The Media Archive] (2017) Available at: https://www.retriever-info.com/ (accessed 
8 September 2017).
Mills CW (1940) Situated actions and vocabularies of motive. 
American Sociological Review
5(6): 
904–913.
Rehurek R and Sojka P (2010) Software framework for topic modelling with large corpora. 
In: 
Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks
, 
22 May 2010, pp. 45–50. Valletta: University of Malta.
Ryle G (1949) 
The Concept of Mind
. London: Hutchinson.
Smith MR and Marx L (eds) (1994) 
Does Technology Drive History? The Dilemma of Technological 
Determinism
. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Stubbs M (1996) 
Text and Corpus Analysis: Computer-assisted Studies of Language and Culture
. 
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Subtirelu NC and Baker P (2017) Corpus-based approaches. In: Flowerdew J and Richardson 
JE (eds) 
The Routledge Handbook of Critical Discourse Studies
. Abingdon; New York: 
Routledge, pp. 106–119.
Suler J (2005) The online disinhibition effect. 
International Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic 
Studies
2(2): 184–188.
Symantec (2010) The Norton cybercrime report: The human impact. Available at: https://www.
symantec.com/content/en/us/home_homeoffice/media/pdf/cybercrime_report/Norton_USA-
Human%20Impact-A4_Aug4-2.pdf
Van Dijk T (2013) CDA is NOT a method of critical discourse analysis. Available at: http://
www.edisoportal.org/debate/115-cda-not-method-critical-discourse-analysis 
(accessed 
7 
September 2017).
Van Rossum G (2007) Python programming Language. In: 
Proceedings of the USENIX Annual 
Technical Conference
, Santa Clara, CA, 17–22 June, vol. 41, p. 36. USENIX Association 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
Van Wilsem J (2011) Worlds tied together? Online and non-domestic routine activities and their 
impact on digital and traditional threat victimization. 
European Journal of Criminology
8(2): 
115–127.
Wall D (2007) 
Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age
. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
534 
Discourse & Communication 12(5)
Wallach HM, Mimno DM and McCallum A (2009) Rethinking LDA: Why priors matter. In: 
Bengio Y, Schuurmans D, Lafferty J, et al. (eds) 
Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems
. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, pp. 1973–1981.
Wilson M and Daly M (1985) Competitiveness, risk taking, and violence: The young male syn-
drome. 
Ethology and Sociobiology
6(1): 59–73.
Wodak R and Meyer M (2016) Critical discourse studies: History, agenda, theory and methodol-
ogy. In: Wodak R and Meyer M (eds) 
Methods of Critical Discourse Studies
. Los Angeles, 
CA: SAGE, pp. 1–22.
Author biography
Simon Lindgren
is Professor of Sociology at Umeå University in Sweden. He is also the director of 
DIGSUM, a transdisciplinary academic research centre for the study of social dimensions of digi-
tal technology. His research is about language, power and self-organisation in and through online 
social media. He uses discourse analysis, social network analysis and text mining to study the 
relationship between digital media and society (politics, movements, power, resistance, creativity, 
knowledge, affect). Lindgren is the author of 
New Noise
(2013) and 
Digital Media and Society
(2017).
