Towards Generating Text Summaries
for Entity Chains
Shruti Chhabra and Srikanta Bedathur
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology
New Delhi, India
{shrutic,bedathur}@iiitd.ac.in
Abstract.
Given a large knowledge graph,
discovering meaningful
re-
lationships between a given pair of
entities has gained a lot of
atten-
tion in the recent times.
Most existing algorithms focus their attention
on identifying one or more structures –such as relationship chains or
subgraphs– between the entities. The burden of interpreting these results,
after combining with contextual information and description of relation-
ships,
lies with the user.
In this paper,
we present a framework that
eases this burden by generating a textual
summary which incorporates
the context and description of individual (dyadic) relationships, and com-
bines them to generate a ranked list of summaries.
We develop a model
that captures key properties of
a well-written text,
such as coherence
and information content.
We focus our attention on a special
class of
relationship structures, two-length entity chains, and show that the gen-
erated ranked list of summaries have 79% precision at rank-1. Our results
demonstrate that the generated summaries are quite useful to users.
Keywords:
entity
chain,
text
summarization,
relationship
queries,
entity-relationship graphs.
1
Introduction
The use of large entity-relationship graphs such as DBPedia [3], Freebase [5], and
Yago [16], in various information retrieval and discovery tasks have given raise to
many challenging problems.
The problem of discovering long ranging semantic
relationships between a pair or a group of entities has attracted much attention
recently.
Existing solutions take as input a pair of
entities and extract struc-
tures such as a chain of nodes connecting the input pair [2], or a subgraph [10]
from the underlying entity-relationship graph. While these structures are useful
in capturing the important relationships, the burden of interpreting the overall
relationship lies with the user. The attributes such as the context and relation-
ship descriptions that make such an interpretation possible,
are missing from
the extracted structure.
Eﬀorts are being made to associate textual
evidences (such as documents,
sentences, or phrases) that describe underlying relationships in a more human-
understandable form. Information extraction systems such as OpenIE [9], PATTY
M. de Rijke et al. (Eds.): ECIR 2014, LNCS 8416, pp. 136–147, 2014.
c
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
Towards Generating Text Summaries for Entity Chains
137
Table 1. Sample human-generated summaries for two-length entity chains
No. Entity Chain
Human-generated Summary
1
Brooke
Shields,
Andre
Agassi,
Steﬃ
Graf
Andre Agassi was married to Brooke Shields till 1999. He
married Steﬃ Graf in 2001.
2
Richard
Nixon,
John
F.
Kennedy,
Lyndon Johnson
John F.
Kennedy defeated Richard Nixon in 1960 U.S.
presidential
election.
Lyndon Johnson became president
after Kennedy.
3
Afghanistan,
Opium, Europe
Afghanistan is the world leading producer of Opium. The
better quality Opium is smuggled to Europe.
4
Charlie
Sheen,
Martin Sheen,
West
Wing
Charlie Sheen is son of Martin Sheen. Martin was a part
of television drama, The West Wing.
5
Satwant
Singh,
In-
dira Gandhi,
Opera-
tion Blue Star
Indira Gandhi was killed by two of her sikh bodyguards,
Satwant Singh and Beant Singh, in the aftermath of Op-
eration Blue Star.
Operation Blue Star was an Indian
army’s assault on the Golden Temple, ordered by Indira
Gandhi.
[25], and NELL [6] routinely maintain textual evidences for relations they extract.
Techniques such as support sentence retrieval [4] help to retrieve short passages
or sentences from a text corpus for a given entity. Despite these, the complex task
of combining these evidences available for individual relationships rests with the
user.
To address these issues, we propose the idea of generating textual summaries
corresponding to the extracted relationship structures. In this paper, we restrict
our attention on simple chain structures consisting of
two entities connected
through an intermediate entity, which we call as two-length entity chains. Con-
sidering sentence-level evidence associated with edges, we develop a model that
generates candidate summaries for a given two-length entity chain by combin-
ing the sentences associated with individual edges in the chain and ranks these
candidate summaries.
Clearly,
the summaries generated by the underlying model
must satisfy the
basic properties of a well-written, human generated summary. Table 1 illustrates
some human-generated summaries for sample entity chains.
Humans use their
knowledge of writing a well formed text in presenting the facts related to given
entities, which makes the summaries understandable (as presented in Table 1).
The aim of our model is to generate such good quality summaries.
We conducted experiments to identify the key properties of
a good quality
summary. Based on the insights from literature [1][21][26] and our initial exper-
iments [7],
we argue that the following three properties are crucial
to capture
the intrinsic characteristics of a good summary:
