Vector-Based Similarity Measurements
for Historical Figures
Yanqing Chen, Bryan Perozzi, and Steven Skiena
(
B
)
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
{cyanqing,bperozzi,skiena}@cs.stonybrook.edu
Abstract.
Historical
interpretation beneﬁts from identifying analogies
among famous people:
Who are the Lincolns,
Einsteins,
Hitlers,
and
Mozarts? We investigate several
approaches to convert approximately
600,000 historical ﬁgures into vector representations to quantify similar-
ity according to their Wikipedia pages.
We adopt an eﬀective reference
standard based on the number of human-annotated Wikipedia categories
being shared and use this to demonstrate the performance of our similar-
ity detection algorithms. In particular, we investigate four diﬀerent unsu-
pervised approaches to representing the semantic associations of individ-
uals: (1) TF-IDF, (2) Weighted average of distributed word embedding,
(3) LDA Topic analysis and (4) Deepwalk embedding from page links.
All proved eﬀective, but Deepwalk embedding yielded an overall accuracy
of 91.33% in our evaluation to uncover historical
analogies.
Combining
LDA and Deepwalk yielded even higher performance.
Keywords:
Vector representations
·
People similarity
·
Deepwalk
1
Introduction
Historical interpretation beneﬁts from identifying analogies among famous peo-
ple:
Who are the Lincolns,
Einsteins,
Hitlers,
and Mozarts? Eﬀective analogies
should reﬂect shared personality traits,
historical
eras,
and domains of accom-
plishment,
but usually only particular facets of these individuals are captured.
Analogies are of
course highly subjective,
and hence rest at least partially in
the eyes of the beholder: “there are a thousand Hamlets in a thousand people’s
eyes”. For instance, Figure 1 gives closest analogies on diﬀerent aspects of
Isaac
Newton
:
Detailed similarity quantiﬁcation cannot create a perfect ranking to satisfy
everyone, especially for pairs of people that sit on the same “level” of similarity.
However, people on diﬀerent “level” are deﬁnitely comparable. We are interested
in developing a generalized model
to identify analogous ﬁgures of a reasonably
high similarity level,
based on semantics in text and connections of history.
It
could be very evocative when correctly identiﬁed examples like:
Martin Luther
King
and
Nelson Mandela
;
George Washington
and
Mao Zedong
;
Babe Ruth
and
Sachen Tendlukar
.
c
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
G. Amato et al. (Eds.): SISAP 2015, LNCS 9371, pp. 179–190, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-25087-8 17
180
Y. Chen et al.
Fig. 1. Sample analogous historical ﬁgures of Isaac Newton and corresponding expla-
nations of
similarity.
Analogies are highly subjective,
making it impossible to ﬁnd
perfectly fair and objective gold standards.
In this paper, we propose methods for identifying historical analogies through
the large-scale analysis of
Wikipedia pages,
as well
as a reference standard to
judge the eﬀectiveness of our methods. The most obvious applications of this are
in historical interpretation and education, but we believe that the problem runs
considerably deeper since being able to identify similar individuals goes to the
heart of algorithms for suggesting friends in social
networks,
or even matching
algorithms pairing up roommates or those seeking romantic partners.
Speciﬁcally, our work makes the following contributions:
– We propose to use information extracted from Wikipedia categories to be
as reference standards to solve this task.
Though not perfect,
these human
labeled features imply relationships and are shared between similar people.
We generated in total 3,000,000 triples of variable and prescribed diﬃculty,
providing an eﬀective standard to evaluate the performance of our similarity
measurement algorithms.
– We investigate four diﬀerent unsupervised approaches to extract semantic
associations from Wikipedia.
All
proved eﬀective and our best approach of
Deepwalk yielded an overall
accuracy of 91.33% in agreement with human
annotated Wikipedia categories. We provide an interactive demonstration of
