A Non-intrusive Movie Recommendation System
Tania Farinella
1
, Sonia Bergamaschi
2
, and Laura Po
2
1
vfree.tv GmbH,
Agnes-Pockels-Bogen 1
80992 M¨
unchen, Germany
tania.farinella@vfree.tv
http://vfree.tv/
2
Department of Engineering “Enzo Ferrari”,
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
Via Vignolese 905, 41125 Modena, Italy
{sonia.bergamaschi,laura.po}@unimore.it
http://www.dbgroup.unimo.it
Abstract.
Several
recommendation systems
have been developed to
support the user in choosing an interesting movie from multimedia repos-
itories.
The widely utilized collaborative-ﬁltering systems focus on the
analysis of user proﬁles or user ratings of the items. However, these sys-
tems decrease their performance at the start-up phase and due to privacy
issues, when a user hides most of his personal data. On the other hand,
content-based recommendation systems compare movie features to sug-
gest similar multimedia contents; these systems are based on less invasive
observations,
however they ﬁnd some diﬃculties to supply tailored sug-
gestions.
In this paper, we propose a plot-based recommendation system, which
is based upon an evaluation of similarity among the plot of a video that
was watched by the user and a large amount of plots that is stored in a
movie database. Since it is independent from the number of user ratings,
it is able to propose famous and beloved movies as well as old or unheard
movies/programs that are still strongly related to the content of the video
the user has watched.
We experimented diﬀerent
methodologies
to compare natural
lan-
guage descriptions of
movies (plots) and evaluated the Latent Seman-
tic Analysis (LSA) to be the superior one in supporting the selection of
similar plots. In order to increase the eﬃciency of LSA, diﬀerent models
have been experimented and in the end, a recommendation system that
is able to compare about two hundred thousands movie plots in less than
a minute has been developed.
Keywords:
Recommendation, Personalized Content, Movie, Latent Se-
mantic Analysis.
1
Introduction
Nowadays movie repositories oﬀer datasets of over 100000 items and their size
increases every year
by around 5000 items
due to the new released movies
R. Meersman et al. (Eds.): OTM 2012, Part II, LNCS 7566, pp. 736–751, 2012.
c
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012
A Non-intrusive Movie Recommendation System
737
(according to Screen Digest
1
).
Searching for a movie of interest in such a large
amount of data is a time consuming task.
Information ﬁltering
systems can be
a powerful tool in giving assistance to the user. Thus, particularly in a multime-
dia environment, they are implemented to minimize user eﬀort, to increase user
satisfaction and to realize a more pleasant experience. For this purpose, recom-
mendation methodologies have been integrated into customized media content
distribution services.
At the state of
the art,
the main methodologies analyze
user proﬁles and user ratings of the data items to compute item similarity. Con-
sequently,
they ﬁnd some diﬃculties from the start as user preferences are not
necessarily available for the system. Moreover these systems are quite intrusive
as they need active feed-back from users or their personal data. Content-based
recommendation systems, instead, utilize movie features (such as title, director,
year of production . . . ) and, combining similarity measurements, they deﬁne how
similar two movies are. While comparing movie features is quite easy, comparing
plots is a challenging task; to our knowledge, none of the movie recommendation
systems have proposed an algorithm based on the analysis of the plots till now.
Moreover, the aim of this work was to oﬀer recommendations that also include
shows that are less popular or forgotten, because too old for example, but that
can still be interesting for the user.
In this paper we propose a plot-based recommendation system which is based
upon an evaluation of similarity among the plot of the movie that was watched by
the user and a large amount of movie plots that is stored in a movie database. We
exploit state-of-the-art text similarity techniques in order to evaluate similarity
of natural language features such as plots. Then, we combined similarity of plots
with similarity of non-verbose features, such as release year, crew etc.
that are
computed by exact matching.
In order to compare natural language features a vector space model was devel-
oped following the approach used in an Information Retrieval
environment [8].
Within the vector space model, each text is represented as a vector of keywords
with associated weights.
These weights depend on the distribution of the key-
words in the given training set of plots that are stored in the database. In order
to calculate these weights we exploit and compare diﬀerent techniques:
simple
weighting technique and semantic weighting techniques.
Weighting techniques such as Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency
(tf-idf) and Log Entropy (log) assign a weight to each keyword that has been
extracted from a text using lemmatizers and taggers. The vectors that are gen-
erated have a large size, as each of them consists of as many elements as many
keywords have been extracted from the whole corpus of
texts,
and are very
sparse,
as all
the keywords that do not appear in a text are associated in the
corresponding vector to a zero-value element.
To generate small
and non-sparse vectors (about 500 elements),
the output
of
the cited weighting techniques is reﬁned by applying LSA [14].
LSA allows
to assign non-zero values to keywords that do not appear in a text but that
are still
related to its contents.
The strong correlation between LSA weights
1
http://www.screendigest.com/
