Twitter Author Profiling Using Word Embeddings and
Logistic Regression
Notebook for PAN at CLEF 2017
Liliya Akhtyamova
1
, John Cardiff
1
, Andrey Ignatov
2
1
Institute of Technology Tallaght, Ireland
liliya.akhtyamova@postgrad.ittdublin.ie,
john.cardiff@it-tallaght.ie
2
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Abstract
The general goal of the author profiling task is to determine various
social and demographic aspects of the author based on his pieces of writing. In
this work, we propose an approach that combines word embeddings and classical
logistic regression for identifying author gender and language variety based on
the corresponding tweets. The model was trained on PAN 2017 Twitter Corpus
that contains data for English,
Spanish,
Portuguese and Arabic languages from
more than 11 thousand authors. Due to its simplicity, the proposed solution can be
treated as a baseline for both gender and language variety identification subtasks.
1
Introduction
With the world becoming more digital, the personal data of internet users such as their
gender, age, ethnicity or personality type is playing more and more important role in the
modern life. This information can be used for providing relevant search results, recom-
mending appropriate connections in social networks, fraud prediction or personalized
advertising. While there have been already proposed numerous solutions to tackle this
kind of problems, the majority of them were relying on hand-designed features and var-
ious heuristics. In this works, we propose a simple fully-automated way of performing
author profiling based on text data. The detailed architecture of our system is described
in the following sections.
2
Models and Methods
In this section,
we give an overview of the proposed method and describe its main
components.
2.1
Dataset
In this work, we use PAN 2017 Author Profiling Dataset [2] published along with the
corresponding shared task [1]. This dataset contains tweets from 11400 users for En-
glish, Spanish, Portuguese and Arabic languages. For each tweet, there is an information
about his author id, author gender and author language variety. The language variations
presented in this dataset are the following:
•
English:
Australia, Canada, Great Britain, Ireland, New Zealand, United States
•
Spanish:
Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Spain, Venezuela
•
Portuguese:
Brazil, Portugal
•
Arabic:
Egypt, Gulf, Levantine, Maghrebi
Overall, there are 360K, 420K, 120K and 240K tweets for English, Spanish, Por-
tuguese and Arabic languages, respectively. These tweets are further used as an input
data for our algorithm.
2.2
Input Processing
In this task, the input to our classification model has the form of the sentence (tweet)
T
that is treated as an ordered sequence of words:
T = {w
1
, w
2
, ..., w
N
}
. First, plain
words are mapped to their vector representations using a pre-trained word embedding
model, which in our case is word2vec. The resulting representations are summed and
averaged to form a single sentence vector
M
T
, which dimensionality
d
is equal to the
dimensionality of word embeddings. This vector is then passed to Logistic Regression
classification algorithm.
2.3
Logistic Regression
Multinomial Logistic Regression is the linear regression analysis to conduct when the
dependent variable is nominal with more than two levels.
Thus it is an extension of
logistic regression,
which analyzes dichotomous (binary) dependents.
Like all
linear
regressions, the multinomial regression is a predictive analysis. Multinomial regression
is used to describe data and to explain the relationship between one dependent nominal
variable and one or more continuous-level(interval or ratio scale) independent variables.
2.4
Alternatives
In our initial experiments we have additionally tried a number of different methods to
solve the considered author profiling problem. Among them were bag-of-words model,
that takes into account the multiplicity of the appearing words in each sentence,
and
CNN-based solution that performs sentence classification based on the sentence ma-
trix [4].
Besides that,
we have also tried various classifiers:
Random Forest,
Linear
Regression, Naive Bayes, SVMs, etc. However, our experiments revealed that these so-
lutions demonstrate the same or worse performance compared to the one proposed in
this work, therefore it was chosen for our submission and final evaluation.
Table 1. The results of the proposed model on both subtasks for four languages.
Language
Language variety identification accuracy, %
Gender identification accuracy, %
English
58.13
74.46
Spanish
80.32
69.46
Portuguese
97.63
68.50
Arabic
44.88
64.25
3
Experiments
To generate word embeddings, we trained a CBOW word2vec model on the initial twit-
ter corpus with a context
window of size 5,
and a vector dimensionality of 300.
A
separate word2vec model was trained for each major language (4 models in total), to do
this Python gensim [3] library was used. Numpy library was utilized for general array
manipulation, and the implementation of Logistic Regression was taken from sklearn
machine learning library. The classifier was trained to minimize
L
2
loss function, the
regularization coefficient was set to
C = 0.1
.
The dataset was split into tow subsets: 90% of the data was used for training the
model, and the rest 10% — for validation. The final results on the test dataset for each
language are presented in the table 1. The proposed model was able to achieve the ac-
curacy of 64% for Arabic language and 68 – 74% for the rest languages in the gender
identification subtask.
The results in the language identification task were highly de-
pendent on the number of predictive classes and the difference between the dialects:
97% for Portuguese (2 classes), 44% for Arabic (4 classes), 58% for English (6 classes)
and 80% for Spanish (7 classes).
Relatively week results for Arabic language can be
explained by the fact that the original hieroglyphs were encoded into unicode, and thus
some relevance between similar hieroglyphs was lost.
4
Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we presented an approach for gender and language variety identification
on twitter data, that is based on the combination of word embeddings and logistic re-
gression models. The proposed solution has the benefits of requiring no hand-designed
features and being applicable to various nlp domains without a need for modifications
in the implementation.
References
1.
Potthast, M., Rangel, F., Tschuggnall, M., Stamatatos, E., Rosso, P., Stein, B.: Overview of
PAN’17: Author Identification, Author Profiling, and Author Obfuscation. In: Jones, G.,
Lawless, S., Gonzalo, J., Kelly, L., Goeuriot, L., Mandl, T., Cappellato, L., Ferro, N. (eds.)
Experimental IR Meets Multilinguality, Multimodality, and Interaction. 8th International
Conference of the CLEF Initiative (CLEF 17). Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York (Sep
2017)
2.
Rangel, F., Rosso, P., Potthast, M., Stein, B.: In: Cappellato, L., Ferro, N., Goeuriot, L.,
Mandl, T. (eds.) Working Notes Papers of the CLEF 2017 Evaluation Labs
3.
ˇ
Reh˚
u
ˇ
rek, R., Sojka, P.: Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. In:
Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks. pp.
45–50. ELRA, Valletta, Malta (May 2010), http://is.muni.cz/publication/884893/en
4.
Severyn, A., Moschitti, A.: Twitter sentiment analysis with deep convolutional neural
networks. In: Proceedings of the 38th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval. pp. 959–962. ACM (2015)
