A Scalable Machine Learning Approach for Inferring Probabilistic US-LI-
RADS Categorization 
Imon Banerjee, Ph.D
1
, Hailey H. Choi, M.D
2
, Terry Desser, M.D
2
, Daniel L. Rubin, M.D
1,2
1
Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University School of Medicine 
Medical School Office Building, Stanford CA 94305-5479; 
2
Department of Radiology, Stanford University School of Medicine 
Stanford CA 94305-5479 
ABSTRACT 
We propose a scalable computerized approach for large-scale inference of Liver Imaging Reporting and Data System 
(LI-RADS) final assessment categories in narrative ultrasound (US) reports. Although our model was trained on 
reports created using a LI-RADS template, it was also able to infer LI-RADS scoring for unstructured reports that 
were created before the LI-RADS guidelines were established. No human-labelled data was required in any step of 
this study; for training, LI-RADS scores were automatically extracted from those reports that contained structured 
LI-RADS scores, and it translated the derived knowledge to reasoning on unstructured radiology reports. By providing 
automated LI-RADS categorization, our approach may enable standardizing screening recommendations and 
treatment planning of patients at risk for hepatocellular carcinoma, and it may facilitate AI-based healthcare research 
with US images by offering large scale text mining and data gathering opportunities from standard hospital clinical 
data repositories. 
INTRODUCTION 
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a worldwide public health problem, and ultrasound (US) examination of the liver 
is at present the only test universally recommended by liver societies for screening patients at risk for its 
development(1). The objective of an HCC screening and surveillance program is to identify HCC at an early, 
preclinical stage when it can potentially be cured either with local therapy or liver transplantation(2), and thus improve 
mortality. Despite the widespread use of US for evaluating the risk of HCC, until recently there have not been 
standardized guidelines for interpretation and reporting of liver findings. The clinical utility of HCC screening can be 
impaired if the US text reports are unclear, ambiguous, or variable from interpreter to interpreter. Recently (2017), the 
American College of Radiology (ACR) has developed the Ultrasound Liver Imaging Reporting and Data System (US 
LI-RADS) which contains standardized terms and management recommendations for sonographic examinations 
performed for HCC screening and surveillance(3). Given the millions of patients at high risk for HCC worldwide, one 
of the main goals of LI-RADS is to improve consensus among clinicians in categorization and management of findings 
on screening and surveillance ultrasound exams. In addition, standardized reporting can facilitate research, radiologist 
productivity, as well as quality assurance and improvement(4). 
During the transition phase from non-LI-RADS reporting (unstructured free-text reports) to LI-RADS reporting, a 
difficult management question is: 
how to follow a patient longitudinally (throughout multiple years) whose ultrasound 
screening exam was reported before LI-RADS was implemented
. Manual chart-review, although cumbersome, is one 
immediate solution, though it is costly and labor intensive. Alternatively, computerized inference of LI-RADS 
category directly from the report text may play a key role in standardizing treatment planning of HCC by automatically 
assigning LI-RADS categories to exams performed before the LI-RADS guideline was proposed. This would allow 
follow up of patients based on LI-RADS on a much larger scale. Moreover, in real time, it may also provide feedback, 
as US reports are dictated to help minimize inconsistencies in reporting of findings and recommendations for follow-
up from one screening time point to the next. Inferring LI-RADS category for all the HCC screening and surveillance 
reports present in a large hospital data repository may facilitate AI-based healthcare research, with US images by 
offering large scale text mining and data gathering opportunities. 
Several standard NLP-based machine learning methods (rule-based, dictionary-based, supervised learning) have been 
successfully applied to radiology reports in other clinical domains for extracting information or performing automatic 
report classification(5–9). Traditional NLP techniques have also been explored with clinical reports of screening 
studies for colorectal adenoma(10), inflammatory bowel disease(11), fatty liver disease(12), aortic aneurysm(6), and 
liver steatosis(13). However, a major limitation of these earlier studies is the requirement for large-scale human-
labeled data or explicit hand-written linguistic rules that limit both the scalability and generalizability of the system. 
In contrast with the previous approaches, recent advances in NLP techniques can be leveraged for the automatic 
interpretation of free-text narratives by exploiting distributional semantics and can provide adequate generalizability 
by addressing linguistic variability(14,15). We propose a scalable NLP pipeline (
Figure 1
) for inferring LI-RADS 
coding by considering only the liver findings written in the narrative, unstructured form in US reports. The core 
novelties of the proposed pipeline are: 
(1) In the US LI-RADS case-study, we translated our previously proposed algorithm(14,16) which was originally 
developed for parsing CT radiology reports. We applied the unsupervised algorithm that combines distributional 
semantics with the semantic dictionary mapping technique to create a dense vector representation of the liver findings 
written in narrative form; 
(2) In addition to the previous studies, we exploited the word-vector embedding space to learn a LI-RADS vocabulary 
(semantic dictionary) using word similarity clustering (
Table 2
) from a large mixed corpus of recent LI-RADS coded 
reports and older non-LI-RADS reports, and mapped synonyms to lexicon terms for the non-LI-RADS reports to 
improve the scalability of the pipeline. The application of semantic dictionary mapping as the basis of non-LI-RADS 
report parsing helps to handle out-of-vocabulary words and increases the feature extraction efficiency for targeting 
the complex LI-RADS phenotyping task; 
(3) Finally, the vector representations of liver findings along with the quantitative lesion measures extracted via regular 
expressions were utilized in an ensemble machine-learning setting to infer the three LI-RADS final assessment 
categories
1
: 
LI-RADS1 - Negative
, 
LI-RADS2 - Subthreshold
, and 
LI-RADS3 – Positive
(3). An interesting feature of 
this study is that no human-label data were required for training the model, because the LI-RADS scoring was 
automatically extracted from the reports formatted with LI-RADS coding. Once the classifier was trained on the LI-
RADS formatted reports, it was validated on both LI-RADS and non-LI-RADS reports (see 
Results
). 
METHODS 
Dataset 
With the approval of Institutional Review Board (IRB), we collected all the free-text radiology reports of abdominal 
ultrasound examinations done within our institution between August 2007 to December 2017. In total, there were 
92,848 US reports collected over 10 years, and on average about 9,000 US exams were performed per year. Among 
them, 13,860 exams contained the HCC screening procedure code (Table 1). Prior to LI-RADS implementation, the 
impression section of the reports was used to summarize the core observations of the US scans as diagnosis/conclusion. 
Often a summary code-based system [1-9] where 1 means no risk and 9 means highest risk, was used to capture the 
overall status of the abdominal organs. However, there was no formal or standardized way to code the risk of 
hepatocellular carcinoma. 
Starting from January 2017, the LI-RADS system was adopted in our institution for reporting examinations 
of the liver in patients at risk for HCC. In the year 2017, a total 1,744 abdominal US studies were coded with the LI-
RADS reporting format where a unique LIRADS score was reported in the impression section. In Table 1, we present 
quarterly statistics of HCC screening and surveillance exams performed in the year 2017, according to assigned LI-
RADS categories. However, there were 962 HCC screening studies (36%) that did not follow the LI-RADS template
.
Among 1,744 US reports coded with LI-RADS template, we randomly selected 10% of the reports as our 
validation dataset
(147 reports) and remaining reports (1277 reports) were used to 
train
our machine-learning model.
For training and validation, LI-RADS scores assigned by radiologists were available for all 1,744 reports. Yet, a major 
purpose of the study was to infer the LI-RADS score for 11,154 US exams done between 2007 – 2016. However, 
ground truth labels were missing for these reports since LI-RADS coding was not implemented at the time of reporting. 
Thus, for generating the 
test set
, we asked two radiologists (specialized on reading US exams) to assign independently 
LI-RADS labels on a set of 216 reports by analyzing only the findings section of the reports. The reports were only 
included in the 
test set
if the ensembled classifier model’s predicted highest probability is either <0.5 (152 reports) or 
>0.9 (64 reports). The criteria for 
test set
selection was mainly to capture the top and bottom level view of the model’s 
performance. 
Table 1. 
Statistic of our cohort: HCC screening studies between [2007 - 2017]. 
Year 2007 - 2016 (without LI-RADS template)
11,154 
Year 2017 (without LI-RADS template)
962 
1
www.acr.org/Clinical-Resources/Reporting-and-Data-Systems/LI-RADS/Ultrasound-LI-RADS-v2017
Year 2017 (with LI-RADS template)
Quarter 1 
(Jan - March) 
Quarter 2 
(April -June) 
Quarter 3 
(July - Sept.) 
Quarter 4 
(Oct. - Dec.) 
Total 
LI-RADS 1 
112 
328 
640 
519 
1589 
LI-RADS 2 
3 
21 
37 
32 
93 
LI-RADS 3 
2 
4 
32 
30 
62 
System methodology 
We developed a completely automatic system for inferring LIRADS categorization by looking only at the findings 
section of the US reports, which describe liver observations. The main modules of the system are presented in Figure 
1 and the following subsections describe the working principle of the three core steps of our pipeline (highlighted in 
dotted line).
Figure 1. 
Proposed pipeline of LI-RADS inference system
Step 1: Learning word semantics 
We found great variability in the linguistic style, reporting structure, and terms within our US report corpus collected 
over 2007-2017 within the same institution. Even with LI-RADS template, we saw term variations (use of synonyms) 
for reporting liver lesion features. For instance, in the LI-RADS reporting format, the same lesion was described by 
one reader as “
hyperechoic and thin septation
" while another rater describes it as “
hyperechogenic and multicystic
". 
The term variations expanded rapidly when considering US reports formatted without LI-RADS guidelines. In Step 1 
of our method, the goal is to apply distributional semantics to learn the similarity between various terms used by the 
various radiologists for reporting the liver US findings across a large time window in an unsupervised way, with the 
intent of successfully mapping the terms that have been used before and after LI-RADS template implementation. 
We developed a python-based LIVER section segmentation module that uses a combination of regular 
expressions to find and extract the liver findings from the whole report while maintaining dependencies between 
anatomical entities (e.g. all the lesions found within the liver would be extracted even if they are not describe in the 
same paragraph). In order to perform a valid experiment, we excluded the 
Impression
section of the reports since the 
final LI-RADS assessment category is often reported explicitly in the 
Impression
. The 
Findings
section includes only 
the imaging characteristics of the liver abnormalities; thus, it does not contain any clear-cut definition of the LI-RADS 
final assessment classes. We extracted the liver section from all the abdominal US reports, including the non-HCC 
studies (on total 92,848 US reports); this enabled learning of more targeted similarity of words that can only be applied 
in the liver context. 
All the extracted liver sections were transformed through a series of pre-processing steps to truncate the texts 
and to focus only on the significant concepts. This was accomplished by normalizing the texts to lowercase letters, 
word stemming, number to string conversion, and removing words of following types: general stop words, words with 
very low frequency [50], unwanted terms and phrases. Words appearing in either all reports or in very few reports 
have little or no value in document classification. We used the NLTK library(17) for determining a stop-word list and 
discarded them during indexing. Examples of the stop-words are: a, an, are,...,be, by,...,has, he,...,etc. In order to 
preserve the local dependencies, bigram collocations of all possible word-pairs were calculated for the entire pre-
processed corpus based on Pointwise Mutual Information(18). The bigrams with fewer than 50 occurrences were 
discarded and the top 1000 bigram collocations were concatenated as a single word entities were to improve the 
accuracy of the word embeddings. A few examples of derived resultant bigrams from liver US are - ‘
ill_defined
’, 
‘
viral_hepatitis
’, ‘
contrast_agent
’, ‘
long_axis
’, ‘
echo_texture
’, ‘
capsul_smooth
’. We also used a dictionary-style 
controlled-term mapping technique, where publicly available CLEVER terminology
2
was used to replace common 
analogies/synonyms to create more semantically structured texts. We focused on the terms that described family, 
progress, risk, negation, and punctuations, and normalized them using the formal terms derived from the terminology. 
For instance, {‘mother’, ‘brother’, ‘wife’ .. }

‘
FAMILY
’, {‘no’, ‘absent’, ‘adequate to rule her out’ .. }

‘
NEGEX
’, 
{‘suspicion’, ‘probable’, ‘possible’ }

‘
RISK
’, {‘increase’, ‘invasive’, ‘diffuse’, .. }

‘
QUAL
’. 
After the pre-processing step, the corpus of 92,848 abdominal US reports was used to create vector 
embeddings for words in a completely unsupervised manner using the word2vec model. The word2vec adopts 
distributional semantics to learn dense vector representations of all words in the pre-processed corpus by analyzing 
the context. In other words, the vectors produced represent each word or phrase as a mathematical combination of the 
words and phrases surrounding it within a linear context window. We first constructed a vocabulary from our pre-
processed tokenized corpus that contains
2000 unique words. Vector representations of words in the vocabulary is 
learned by a CBOW word2vec model using the Gensim 2.1.0 library(19). The CBOW word2vec model predicts a 
word 
given 
a 
context 
where 
the 
window 
size 
defines 
context. 
The 
loss 
function 
of 
CBOW 
is: 
)
'.
(
exp
log
'.
=
1
=
h
v
h
v
E
j
w
V
j
o
w



, where 
o
w
is the output word, 
'
o
w
v
is its output vector, 
h
is the average 
of vectors of the context words, and V is the entire vocabulary. Once the model constructed the vectors, we used the 
cosine distance of vectors to denote similarity, thereby deriving analogies. As the training algorithm, we used Negative 
Sampling where the cost function is: 
)
'.
(
log
)
'.
(
log
=
h
v
h
v
E
j
w
neg
j
w
o
w








, where 
neg

is the set of 
negative samples, 
o
w
is the output word, 
'
o
w
v
is its output vector and h is the average of vectors of the context 
words. 
To test the semantic validity of the trained model, we derived the synonyms of the terms belonging to the LI-
RADS lexicon set by computing the similarity score between the word vectors as cosine similarity which is inner 
product 
on 
the 
normalized 
space 
that 
measures 
the 
cosine 
of 
the 
angle 
between 
two 
words: 
2
1
=
2
1
=
1
=
=
=
i
n
i
i
n
i
i
i
n
i
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
Similarity




. In Table 2, we only report the synonyms derived by the model with 
0.80
>
similarity score which shows that the model can capture the basic terms variation for liver reporting. 
Table 2. 
Synonyms of LI-RADS terminology derived by the model. 
Categories 
LI-RADS Lexicon 
Synonyms generated 
Echogenicity 
hyperechoic 
hyperechogenic, hyperecho 
isoechoic 
isoecho 
hypoechoic 
hypoechogenicity, hypoechogen, hypoecho 
cystic 
anecho, anechoic 
nonshadowing 
non_shadowing 
2
https://github.com/stamang/CLEVER/blob/master/res/dicts/base/clever_base_terminology.txt
Doppler vascularity 
hypovascular 
nonenhancing 
avascular 
nonvascular 
hypervascular 
hypervascularity 
Architecture 
septation 
septat, septations, multicystic, septa, complex_cyst, 
intern_septation, thin_septation, multispet, reticul, fishnet, 
multilocul 
complex 
complicated, solid_and_cystic 
Morphology 
lobulated 
bilobe, macrolobulated, microlobulated 
round 
oval, rounded, ovoid, oblong 
ill-define 
vague, indistinct 
exophytic 
bulge 
well_defined 
well_circumcribed, marginated 
Step 2: Learning LI-RADS coding 
After learning the semantics of individual words that are used for characterization of liver findings, the next challenge 
was 
how to train the machine to infer LI-RADS coding by exploiting the existing knowledge
. Our goal was to minimize 
the human annotator involvement as much as possible. Nevertheless, we needed an annotated dataset to teach the 
machine the LI-RADS assessment principles. Therefore, we used a simple regular expression to extract the recorded 
LI-RADS categories from the impression section of those reports that used the LI-RADS template. The success rate 
of the LI-RADS category extraction was 100% since a very standard reporting format is used which is trivial to code 
using regular expressions. This helped generate a training set size of 1744 annotated reports. 
Finally, the liver section embedding was created by averaging the word vectors generated via the trained 
model. According to previous studies(20), averaging the embeddings of words in a sentence/paragraph has been 
proven 
a 
successful 
way 
of 
obtaining 
embeddings, 
where 
each 
section 
vector 
was 
computed 
as: 
w
doc
V
w
doc
doc
v
V
v


1
=
, where 
doc
V
is the set of words in the report and 
w
v
refers to the word vector of word 
w
. The dense and relatively lower dimensional (compare to bag-of-words) numerical representation of the texts 
reflecting liver characterizations were used as feature vector to train efficiently a supervised classifier that can leverage 
the LI-RADS labels extracted earlier to learn the coding principle. 
An interesting LI-RADS guideline for differentiating LI-RADS 2 (Subthreshold) from LI-RADS 3(Positive) 
is that the lesion must be 
≥
10mm to qualify as LI-RADS 3. Therefore, there is a clear need to capture the quantitative 
properties of lesion with maximum dimension. Theoretically, the word2vec model should also learn to interpret the 
difference between numerical values. However, due to the limitation of the training corpus size (usually in generic 
domain trained with millions of text snippets), the model was not able to learn every numerical combination, instead 
learning them all as generic number set. For example, the top similar word for ‘
one
’ was ‘
nine
’, and the set of top nine 
similar words contained all one-digit numbers. Thus, we extracted another set of features from the liver section using 
linguistic rules that captured two quantitative measurements: (1) number of lesions present in the liver, and (2) long-
axis length of the largest lesion. For long-axis length, we extracted all 3D, 2D and 1D lesion measures mentioned in 
the text, normalized unit to mm, and identified the maximum value. 
Finally, we trained an ensemble classifier - a meta-classifier targeted to predict LI-RADS scoring by 
combining two different classifiers based on weighted voting: (1) 
section embedding classifier
: takes vector 
representation of the liver section as input, and (2) 
lesion measure classifier
: takes the two quantitative lesion measures 
as input. Logistic regression with stochastic average gradient solver was used to build the section embedding classifier 
while decision tree classifier was applied on the quantitative lesion measures. We believe that the ensembles of these 
classifiers can be more powerful than any of the individual members since nature of both classifiers is complimentary 
in the sense that the possible errors made by the classifiers should be uncorrelated. For instance, if the section 
embedding classifier failed to differentiate LI-RADS 2 and LI-RADS 3, the lesion measure classifier should be able 
to distinguish them. To manage the class imbalance issue within the 
training dataset
(see 
Dataset
section), we 
performed over-sampling using the Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique (SMOTE) for the under-represented 
LI-RADS class 2 and 3. 
Step 3: Infer LI-RADS coding 
In this study, one of our final objectives were to train the ensemble classifier with the features extracted only from the 
US reports coded with LI-RADS template (
training set
) and use the model to infer the LI-RADS coding for all the 
remaining reports that were not written following the LI-RADS guideline (
test set
). We extracted the same set of 
features from the testing set by using the trained word2vec model and the lesion measure extraction rules. We found 
that the extraction rules are easily generalizable for different report formats, since lesion measures are always 
documented using somewhat similar styling (e.g. 3D - 
1.2 × 1.3 × 0.9
cm, 2D - 
1.2 × 1.3
cm, 1D - 
1.2
cm). 
However, before generating the section embedding, we replaced all the synonyms of LI-RADS lexicon terms 
with the root term (see Table 2) to create normalized section embeddings for the test set. In the current setting, we 
only used 1,589 US reports coded with LI-RADS to infer the LI-RADS scoring for 11,154 US exam reports done 
between 2007 -2016. In the following section, we report the performance of the model on both
validation (147 reports 
with LI-RADS template)
and 
test dataset (216 reports without LI-RADS template).
RESULTS 
Performance with LI-RADS template: validation of the model 
In clinical practice, inter-rater disagreement is often reported regarding the final assessment of LI-RADS categories. 
We compared head-to-head the performance of two independent radiologists (rater 1 and rater 2) specialized in reading 
US exams against our proposed machine learning model. We considered the LI-RADS category reported by the 
original interpreting radiologist as the true label. The performance of human raters and the proposed model on the 
validation set
(147 reports) is reported in Table 3 as 
precision
, 
recall
, and 
f1 score
: harmonic mean of precision and 
recall value. In this experiment, there was a high interrater agreement for LI-RADS scoring as the raters are from the 
same institution and mutually agreed upon a set of internal rules beforehand. We also present performance of a 
machine learning classifiers only using unigrams as features which can be considered as the baseline machine learning 
performance to be compared with the proposed ensemble classifier. 
While the reported performance of the baseline with unigrams (measured as f1 score) is 0.52 averaged over 
all three LI-RADS classes, the proposed model f1 score is 0.90 which is comparable with the human rater’s 
performance in annotating the same validation set. This demonstrates that our model was able to learn the significant 
facets of the liver findings for characterizing LI-RADS. The precision of the proposed model’s categorization is equal 
to the highest scoring human rater while the recall is slightly low. It is important to analyze the LI-RADS class-wise 
prediction to understand the scoring trend of the machine as well as of the raters. However, because of averaging over 
all the LI-RADS classes, these observations can only represent an overall accuracy, but cannot provide a proper 
reflection
on the scoring. 
Table 3: 
Comparison of machine-generated annotations with two human raters: reports with LI-RADS template 
Machine inferred annotation 
Human annotation 
BOW classifier 
Proposed model 
Rater 1 
Rater 2 
Average precision 
0.59 
0.93 
0.92 
0.93 
Average recall 
0.49 
0.88 
0.92 
0.92 
Average f1 score 
0.52 
0.90 
0.92 
0.92 
In Figures 2 and 3, we present the class-wise prediction performance of the human raters and machine 
learning classifiers as confusion matrix where x-axis represents predicted outcome and y-axis represents the true 
labels, and numerical values show class-wise sample in each cell. In order to show the proficiency of final ensemble 
model, we also present the individual confusion matrix for lesion measure classifier (Figure 3.a) and section 
embedding classifier (Figure 3.b). Lesion measure classifier performed better in classifying LI-RADS 3 while section 
embedding classifier outperformed in LI-RADS 1 and 2 categorization. As expected, the ensemble classifier combined 
the two individual classifiers’ strengths and achieved uniform classification power for all three LI-RADS classes, 
which is comparable to the human raters. An exciting outcome is that the proposed model outperformed human raters 
in classifying LI-RADS 2 and LI-RADS 3 categories. 
(a)
Annotated by rater 1
(b)
Annotated by rater 2
Figure 2. 
Human raters’ performance for inferring LI-RADS coding looking at the LIVER findings (147 cases). 
(a)
Classifier trained on lesion properties
(b)
Classifier trained on section embedding
(c) Ensemble classifier (lesion properties + section embedding) 
Figure 3. 
Machine performance for inferring LI-RADS coding looking at the LIVER findings (147 cases). 
In Table 4, we present the reasons for disagreement between the human raters and the original image reader 
for a few cases, and also highlight the probabilistic prediction value of the proposed model. This shows that there is 
no well-defined ground truth for labeling, and individual experts may have different opinions. The model prediction 
is mostly consistent with the scoring of the original reader (with one exception); however, the class probability value 
clearly shows that model is deciding between reader’s defined label and raters’ observation. Being trained on the 
dataset which involves multiple US image readers with significant disagreement for some cases, the probabilistic 
prediction of the model represents an interesting integrated view of multiple individuals for these complicated cases. 
Table 4: 
Examples of disagreement between original US image reader and the raters. Also includes the probabilistic 
and discrete prediction outcome of the proposed algorithm for those cases. 
Liver Segment 
Original 
coding 
Machine 
derived 
probability 
Imputed 
label 
Rater 
1 
Rater 
2 
Reason 
1 
2 
3 
liver length: 14.2 cm. 
liver appearance: mild steatosis. 
segment 5 lesion, previously characterized as 
a hemangioma on february 2014 mr now 
measures 1.0 x 1.0 x 0.9 cm, previously 0.7 x 
0.6. previously seen optn class 5a lesion on 
february 2014 mr is not well seen on 
ultrasound. null a small right hepatic lobe 
cyst measures 7 x 6 x 7 mm, previously 10 x 
9 x 9 mm. no new hepatic lesions.
3 
0.56 
0.06 
0.38 
1 
1 
1 
Previously 
characterized as 
hemangioma, therefore 
should be categorized 
as benign 
liver 
length: 
17.6 
cm. 
liver 
appearance: 
normal. liver observations: 0.6 x 1.1 x 1.3 cm 
hyperechoic 
focus 
in 
the 
right 
liver 
was 
minimal 
flow 
likely 
representing 
a 
hemangioma 
or 
focal 
fat. 
liver 
doppler: 
hepatic veins: patent with normal triphasic 
waveforms. 
1 
0.55 
0.06 
0.4 
1 
2 
3 
Includes hemangioma 
or fat (both benign), 
but this is not definite 
and needs 
characterization 
liver length: 12.1 cm. liver appearance: mild 
steatosis. hypoechoic left hepatic lobe lesion 
measures 1.2 x 0.5 x 0.7 cm, decreased from 
3/8/2017 
ct 
and 
not 
significantly 
changed 
from more recent pet/ct. 
1 
0.45 
0.10 
0.44 
1 
3 
3 
Observation 
is 
stable 
from prior imaging, but 
not definitely benign 
liver length: 16 cm. 
liver 
appearance: 
severe 
steatosis. 
null 
no 
surface nodularity. liver observations: 1.7 x 
1.4 
x 
1.0 
cm 
hypoechoic 
focus 
in 
the 
gallbladder fossa likely reflects focal fatty 
sparing. 
null 
no 
surface 
nodularity. 
liver 
doppler: hepatic veins: patent with normal 
triphasic waveforms.
3 
0.43 
0.17 
0.40 
3 
1 
1 
Fatty sparing is benign 
Performance without LI-RADS template: test on reports with different linguistic style 
Finally, we used the trained ensemble model to infer the LI-RADS score for 11,154 US exams done between 2007 - 
2016. To verify the model’s performance, we used the 
Test set 
created by
two independent radiologists who assigned 
LI-RADS labels on a subset of 216 reports coded without LI-RADS template where the model’s predicted highest 
probability is either <0.5 (152 reports) or >0.9 (64 reports) (see 
Dataset
section). 
For the labels provided by rater 1, the proposed model scored an average of 0.77 precision and 0.63 recall, 
while for rater 2, the average precision was 0.74 and recall was 0.62. Figure 4 represents class-wise performance for 
individual raters as confusion matrix. The figure shows that the model achieved >85% accuracy in classifying LI-
RADS 2, 60% in LI-RADS 3, and 57% for LI-RADS 1 for both raters. Actually, the model is overestimating LI-
RADS 1 as LI-RADS 2, and underestimating LI-RADS 3 as LI-RADS 2. This is probably due to the inconsistency in 
the training dataset and accumulating confusion between different readers while classifying adjacent LI-RADS 
classes. As a matter of fact, there was also significant disagreement between the original image readers and the raters 
upon LI-RADS 2 and 3 categorization for the report that followed the LI-RADS template as seen in Figure 2. 
Figure 4: 
Performance of the proposed model for inferring LI-RADS coding: from 216 reports formatted without LI-
RADS template. 
DISCUSSION 
In this study, we proposed an automatic pipeline to infer the LI-RADS category of the free-text liver ultrasound 
reports. The model was trained on the reports created using a LI-RADS template and validated on both LI-RADS (147 
reports) and non-LI-RADS (216 reports) coded reports. We translated our previously proposed pipeline(14,16) to 
generate the vector representation of free-text liver finding documented in the US reports, and we designed an 
ensemble machine-learning model that considered the section vectors generated via Step 1 - 2 and quantitative lesion 
measures (Step 2) as inputs and inferred the LI-RADS score. 
The core methodological challenge and contribution of our work was how to transfer the machine learning model that 
has been trained on the LI-RADS reports, and to apply on a different set of US report corpus that were written before 
the establishment of LI-RADS standard. This is because, in the LI-RADS reports, the radiologists supposedly used 
only a pre-defined set of terms for describing liver and lesion characteristics following the LI-RADS guidelines, 
whereas the non-LI-RADS reports were collected over a wide-span of time (August 2007 to December 2016) which 
may not only have a wide diversity in the reporting format, but also contains huge variability in the linguistic style, 
and reporting terms. Thanks to the use of distributional semantics approach, our model was able to learn the semantic 
similarity between various terms used by multiple radiologists for reporting the liver US findings across a large time 
window in an unsupervised way, and successfully mapped the terms that had been used before and after LI-RADS 
template implementation for creating the vector embedding of the reports. In order to capture the quantitative lesion 
measures, we also created a set of regular expressions that can extract the number of lesions present in the liver and 
long-axis length of the largest lesion that were generalizable to the non-LI-RADS reports. 
The experimental results demonstrated that, on the LI-RADS coded reports, our ensemble classifier model (section 
embedding + lesion measures) achieved comparable performance with the highest scoring human raters. Due to the 
absent of ground truth for the non-LI-RADS reports, we
compared the model against the labels provided by two raters, 
and the model scored decently when being validated against both: rater 1: 0.77 precision and 0.63 recall; rater 2: 0.74 
precision and recall was 0.62. Reduced performance on the non-LI-RADS test set can be influenced by two main 
factors. First, for capturing a comprehensive view, we selected a mixture of the most difficult and most trivial test 
cases for the experiment, where the number of difficult cases were larger than trivial cases (>2x). Second, there were 
no ground truth labels available for the test set. Therefore, the model was only tested against two individual raters 
while a moderate amount of disagreement has been observed between original images readers and the same raters, 
even for classifying LI-RADS coded reports (see 
Figure 2
). Thus, there were no absolute performance validation for 
non-LI-RADS reports, and only a comparative assessment was possible. 
Our current study is a limited single-center, retrospective study; however, our results suggest that our model can be 
generalizable for inferring LI-RADS scores in a larger scale. Thus, in the transition from non-LI-RADS reporting to 
LI-RADS reporting for HCC screening and surveillance ultrasounds, our method may help in longitudinal follow-up 
of 
patient 
cohorts, 
whose 
ultrasound 
screening 
and 
surveillance 
exams 
were 
performed 
prior 
to 
LI-RADS 
implementation. In the prospective future studies, we will work on combining multiple raters’ views for labeling the 
same reports for training the model more efficiently. We will also evaluate the stability of the liver lesion by tracking 
it through longitudinal ultrasound reports. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported in part by grants from the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
1U01CA190214 and 1U01CA187947. 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Fateen W, Ryder SD. Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma: patient selection and perspectives. J Hepatocell 
Carcinoma. 2017;4:71–9. 
2. 
Heimbach JK, Kulik LM, Finn RS, Sirlin CB, Abecassis MM, Roberts LR, et al. AASLD guidelines for the 
treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology. 2018 Jan;67(1):358–80. 
3. 
American College of Radiology Ultrasound Liver Imaging and Reporting Data System (US LI-RADS) Working 
Group, Morgan TA, Maturen KE, Dahiya N, Sun MRM, Kamaya A. US LI-RADS: ultrasound liver imaging 
reporting and data system for screening and surveillance of hepatocellular carcinoma. Abdominal Radiology. 
2018 Jan;43(1):41–55. 
4. 
Larson DB, Towbin AJ, Pryor RM, Donnelly LF. Improving Consistency in Radiology Reporting through the 
Use of Department-wide Standardized Structured Reporting. Radiology. 2013 Apr;267(1):240–50. 
5. 
Bozkurt S, Lipson JA, Senol U, Rubin DL, Bulu H. Automatic abstraction of imaging observations with their 
characteristics from mammography reports. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 2014 Oct 
28. 
6. 
Morioka C, Meng F, Taira R, Sayre J, Zimmerman P, Ishimitsu D, et al. Automatic Classification of Ultrasound 
Screening Examinations of the Abdominal Aorta. J Digit Imaging. 2016 Dec;29(6):742–8. 
7. 
Percha B, Nassif H, Lipson J, Burnside E, Rubin D. Automatic classification of mammography reports by BI-
RADS breast tissue composition class. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 2012 
Sep;19(5):913–6. 
8. 
Solti I, Cooke CR, Xia F, Wurfel MM. Automated classification of radiology reports for acute lung injury: 
Comparison of keyword and machine learning based natural language processing approaches. In IEEE; 2009 
[cited 2018 Feb 21]. p. 314–9. Available from: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5332081/ 
9. 
Zuccon G, Wagholikar AS, Nguyen AN, Butt L, Chu K, Martin S, et al. Automatic Classification of Free-Text 
Radiology Reports to Identify Limb Fractures using Machine Learning and the SNOMED CT Ontology. AMIA 
Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc. 2013;2013:300–4. 
10. Imler TD, Morea J, Kahi C, Cardwell J, Johnson CS, Xu H, et al. Multi-Center Colonoscopy Quality 
Measurement 
Utilizing 
Natural 
Language 
Processing. 
The 
American 
Journal 
of 
Gastroenterology. 
2015 
Apr;110(4):543–52. 
11. Hou JK, Chang M, Nguyen T, Kramer JR, Richardson P, Sansgiry S, et al. Automated Identification of 
Surveillance Colonoscopy in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Using Natural Language Processing. Digestive 
Diseases and Sciences. 2013 Apr;58(4):936–41. 
12. Redman JS, Natarajan Y, Hou JK, Wang J, Hanif M, Feng H, et al. Accurate Identification of Fatty Liver Disease 
in 
Data 
Warehouse 
Utilizing 
Natural 
Language 
Processing. 
Digestive 
Diseases 
and 
Sciences. 
2017 
Oct;62(10):2713–8. 
13. Chang EK, Yu CY, Clarke R, Hackbarth A, Sanders T, Esrailian E, et al. Defining a Patient Population With 
Cirrhosis: 
An 
Automated 
Algorithm 
With 
Natural 
Language 
Processing. 
J 
Clin 
Gastroenterol. 
2016 
Dec;50(10):889–94. 
14. Banerjee 
I, 
Chen 
MC, 
Lungren 
MP, 
Rubin 
DL. 
Radiology 
Report 
Annotation 
using 
Intelligent 
Word 
Embeddings: Applied to Multi-institutional Chest CT Cohort. Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 2017 Nov. 
15. Gupta A, Banerjee I, Rubin DL. Automatic information extraction from unstructured mammography reports 
using distributed semantics. Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 2018 Feb;78:78–86. 
16. Banerjee I, Madhavan S, Goldman R.E, Rubin D.L. Intelligent Word Embeddings of Free-Text Radiology Reports. 
In AMIA Annual Symposium, Washington, DC; 2017. 
17. Bird S. NLTK: the natural language toolkit. In: COLING/ACL on Interactive presentation sessions. Association 
for Computational Linguistics; 2006. p. 69–72. 
18. Bouma G. Normalized (pointwise) mutual information in collocation extraction. In: Proceedings of GSCL. 2009. 
p. 31–40. 
19. Rehurek R, Sojka P. Software framework for topic modelling with large corpora. In: LREC 2010 Workshop on 
New Challenges for NLP Frameworks. 2010. 
20. Kenter T, Borisov A, Rijke M.D. Siamese CBOW: Optimizing Word Embeddings for Sentence Representations. 
In: 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 2016. p. 941–51. 
