Paper to be presented at DRUID18
Copenhagen Business School, Copenhagen, Denmark
June 11-13, 2018
The Effect of Choosing Teams and Ideas on Entrepreneurial Performance: Evidence
from a Field Experiment
Viktoria Boss
Technical University of Hamburg
Institute of Entrepreneurship
viktoria.boss@tuhh.de
Linus Dahlander
ESMT Berlin
Linus.Dahlander@esmt.org
Christoph Ihl
Hamburg University of Technology
TUHH Institute of Entrepreneurship
christoph.ihl@tuhh.de
Rajshri Jayaraman
ESMT Berlin
rajshri.jayaraman@esmt.org
Abstract
In a natural field experiment with 900+ subjects in 300+ teams, we study the effects of choosing team
members versus ideas on entrepreneurial team performance. We use a two-by-two design in which
subjects are randomly assigned to one of four treatments in which they (i) choose their own team
members but not the idea they pursue; (ii) choose their own idea but not their team; (iii) choose both
their team and the idea to pursue; or (iv) choose neither their team nor the idea. We find that teams
who choose their own idea but not their members perform consistently better than those in the
remaining treatments. We then explore a number of different mechanisms that can account for this
finding.
1 
The Effect of Choosing Teams and Ideas on Entrepreneurial Performance: 
Evidence from a Field Experiment 
Abstract: 
In a natural field experiment with 900+ subjects in 300+ teams, we study the effects of 
choosing team members versus ideas on entrepreneurial team performance. We use a two-by-two 
design in which subjects are randomly assigned to one of four treatments in which they (i) choose 
their own 
team
members but not the idea they pursue; (ii) choose their own 
idea
but not their team; 
(iii) choose 
both
their team and the idea to pursue; or (iv) choose 
neither
their team nor the idea. We 
find that teams who choose their own idea but not their members perform consistently better than 
those in the remaining treatments. We then explore a number of different mechanisms that can 
account for this finding. 
Keywords: 
team formation, idea choice, entrepreneurial performance 
2 
INTRODUCTION 
Two different views are typically proffered when explaining the success of entrepreneurial ventures. 
The first is that the recipe for success rests on choosing the right 
people
in teams. The second view is 
that choosing the right team is less important than choosing the right 
idea
. These two views are not 
incompatible: it stands to reason that both the choice of idea and team members are important for 
entrepreneurial success. What these views have in common is that 
choice
is important in either or both 
of these dimensions. 
This paper asks whether the choice of team members, ideas, or both, drives entrepreneurial 
performance. We conduct a natural field experiment in which participants either can or cannot choose 
along these two dimensions. In this two-by-two design, participants are randomly assigned to one of 
four treatment groups. In the first treatment group – 
Choose both
– participants can choose their own 
team and their own idea. In the second treatment group – 
Choose team
– participants can choose their 
own team but have to work on a randomly assigned pre-defined idea. In the third treatment group – 
Choose idea
– participants can choose their own idea but are randomly assigned to a team. Finally, in 
the baseline treatment 
Choose neither
participants are randomly assigned to both a team and an idea. 
There are at least two theoretical reasons why endogenously chosen teams may perform better 
than exogenously assigned teams (Clarisse and Moray, 2004; Reagans and Zuckerman, 2001). First, 
private information regarding ability or cooperativeness is likely to be more readily observable among 
peers. This may permit the formation of more effective teams – with complementary skills or 
personalities – if individuals can choose their team members on the basis of these privately observed 
characteristics. Second, social capital may facilitate effective teamwork. If team members are selected 
from a peer network, they may be more motivated and better able to work together. 
Innovation is central to entrepreneurship, and a key feature of many entrepreneurial teams is 
that they generate their own ideas. There are at least three reasons to believe that teams that are 
allowed to choose their own idea may perform better than teams to whom an idea has been assigned 
(Lameez and van Knippenberg, 2014; Perry-Smith and Mannucci, 2017). First, giving individuals the 
freedom to choose may allow for the exploration and identification of better ideas to begin with. 
Second, such teams are more likely to choose ideas that match their own competences. Third, team 
members are likely to be more invested in ideas that they themselves have generated, thereby exerting 
more effort in their realization. 
If team choice results in better performance than team assignment, and idea choice results in 
better performance than idea assignment, it is natural to deduce that allowing for choice in both of 
these dimensions results in better performance than disallowing it in one or the other dimension. After 
all, our first treatment, in which people get to choose 
both
their teams 
and
their ideas, is the rule rather 
than the exception in entrepreneurial teams (Dahlander and McFarland, 2013). Theoretically, 
however, the answer to this question is not obvious due to (a variant of) the paradox of choice (Chung 
et al., 2016). Team members who know each other may be too distracted by their social interactions to 
3 
choose suitable ideas or even work efficiently. Similarly, they may choose ideas on the basis of the 
personal preferences of group members rather than the business merit of these ideas. As a result, 
performance may actually be enhanced by restricting choice along one, or both, of these dimensions. 
A casual glance at some of the most successful contemporary entrepreneurships suggests that 
team choice generates great entrepreneurial outcomes. Larry Page and Sergey Brin, who went on to 
found Google, were PhD students together at Stanford. Apple was founded by Steve Jobs and Steve 
Wozniak after the two were introduced while working at Hewlett Packard. Ben and Jerry were friends 
before they started making ice cream. This pattern is represented in the broader data: research on 
entrepreneurship tells us that most entrepreneurs 
choose
their team members, be it relatives, school or 
college classmates, or colleagues (Ruef et al., 2003; Kotha and George, 2012; Schjoedt et al., 2013; 
Ertug and 
Castellucci
, 2013). In addition to choosing their team, the entrepreneurs in these examples 
also chose the idea they pursued. This is also the approach adopted by popular start-up accelerators 
and business incubators, such as Y-Combinator (Isabelle, 2013). We try to emulate this most common 
approach to starting a company with our first treatment: 
Choose both
. 
However, given the potential downsides of leaving that much choice open to future 
entrepreneurs, alternative approaches have also been used. For instance, the German company Rocket 
Internet has spawned a series of companies on the basis of pre-assigned teams and ideas. In essence, 
would-be entrepreneurs are 
allocated
to a team, to work on an 
assigned
idea. Proponents of this 
model argue that although it allows less freedom, it nevertheless permits the team to make faster 
progress. This approach is mimicked by our baseline treatment 
Choose neither
. 
Two of the treatments in our experiment allow choice in only one of the two dimensions. 
While not as apparent at first glance, these treatments also have real-life counterparts. For example, 
hackathons have enjoyed widespread popularity in recent years (Briscoe, 2014). A hackathon brings 
together programmers to work on a pre-defined problem over a short period of time. While these 
programmers are given the choice of who to work with – often arriving at the hackathon as a team – 
the idea they work on is assigned to them. This is reflected in our treatment, “
Choose team
.” Finally, 
assignment to only a team but not an idea is also common in entrepreneurial settings. Often, 
established companies dedicate a portion of their work to so-called corporate entrepreneurship 
(Burgers and Covin, 2016; Monsen et al., 2010; Zahra, 2015). Here, a small group of employees is 
assigned to developing new ideas within and for the company, pushing the boundaries of the 
company’s extant scope of action: a pre-assigned team works on innovative ideas of their choosing. 
This is captured in our treatment, 
Choose idea
. 
Although all four models are used in practice, by accelerators, incubators, companies, and 
entrepreneurs alike, there is relatively little rigorous empirical evidence regarding which model is 
most effective. The aim of this paper is to address this gap, by conducting a field experiment designed 
to disentangle whether choice of team members and ideas matters for entrepreneurial performance. 
4 
PRIOR WORK 
Our main goal is to test how endogenous team formation and idea choice affect entrepreneurial 
performance. Most of the previous literature in this field looks at team composition and its effects on 
different facets of entrepreneurial performance (see e.g., Amason et al., 2006; Cooper and Saral, 
2013; Horwitz and Horwitz, 2007; Steffens et al., 2012). Although studies on entrepreneurship have 
begun to pay closer attention to causal inference using experimental designs, there are surprisingly 
few field studies of teams (Mao et al., 2016). This is due, in large part, to the difficulty in finding a 
field setting with a large group of potential entrepreneurs – one in which the sample of teams is large 
enough to yield statistically meaningful results. This difficulty is aggravated by the dearth of 
entrepreneurial contexts which are open to conducting field experiments. 
In two important studies which cleverly overcome these hurdles, Hoogendoorn and co-
authors investigate the effect of team composition on performance based on exogenous assignment to 
teams. In a first natural field experiment, Hoogendoorn, Oosterbeek and van Praag (2013) study 
undergraduate students who start up a venture as part of their curriculum. This experiment assigns 
students based on gender and finds that more gender-balanced teams outperform male-dominated 
teams. In a follow-up experiment, Hoogendoorn, Parker and van Praag (2017) assign students to 
teams based on measured cognitive abilities. They find that while average ability has no effect on 
outcomes, teams at intermediate levels of ability dispersion outperform very low and very high ability 
dispersion teams. While our paper draws on a similar field setting, its focus is somewhat different. 
While most, if not all, of the literature on teams, discussed below, has explored the effect of team 
composition
on performance, our focus is the effect of team (and idea) 
choice
on performance. Team 
composition, in this context, may be a consequence of choice—and we will explore this, too—but our 
focus is on the ramifications of choice on performance. In what follows, we elaborate on the 
arguments as to why choosing the team and choosing the idea may affect performance. 
Choosing a team 
Teams are considered to be a crucial component of entrepreneurial success. Even though they are 
rarer than solo entrepreneurs, the literature has compellingly argued that entrepreneurial teams 
perform better than solo entrepreneurs (Cooper and Bruno, 1977; Feeser and Willard, 1990; Reynolds 
and White, 1997). Entrepreneurial team formation is important in this context. Beckman and Burton 
(2008) show that the formation phase casts a long shadow, from the point of inception, to the direction 
a venture takes, all the way to its performance in an IPO. Motivated by these findings, the 
entrepreneurship literature has gone to great lengths to understand which characteristics of teams 
improve entrepreneurial performance. For instance, Eesley, Hsu and Roberts (2014) use data from a 
survey of 2,067 firms to show that diversity in founding teams is associated with higher performance, 
particularly in the face of market competition. While these studies are insightful, their reliance on 
5 
observational data makes it difficult to draw causal inference regarding which features of 
entrepreneurial teams’ formation 
result
in higher performance. 
An often-overlooked dimension of entrepreneurial teams is that they are formed for a reason – 
entrepreneurs 
choose
whom they would like to work with, often based on personal preferences or 
complementary skills. Indeed, endogenous team formation is probably more ubiquitous in the context 
of entrepreneurship than it is in paid employment, where employees are often assigned to teams by 
supervisors based on project needs. Self-selection into teams makes it difficult to establish the causal 
effects of team composition on outcomes in real-world settings due to unobserved heterogeneity 
across teams (Hansen et al., 2015). An obvious solution to this problem is exogenous assignment to 
teams in the context of a field experiment. 
We wish to explore whether being able to choose your own team members – as opposed to 
being assigned to a team – has a bearing on performance. There are a few related arguments as to how 
choosing teams might affect performance. When choosing teams, people can choose those with whom 
they have pre-existing relationships, which naturally fosters familiarity among the team members. 
This affords the opportunity for internal cohesion and coordination of tasks between team members 
(Reagans et al. 2003). In addition to leveraging existing network ties, team choice allows the 
possibility of matches based on complementary personality traits, skills or experiences (McPherson et 
al. 2001). Since the nature of relationships between team members determines the effectiveness with 
which a task can be handled (Brannon et al., 2013), self-selected teams may well perform better than 
randomly assigned teams that are, by construction, blind to such complementarities. 
At the same time, choosing the right collaborators from an efficiency or performance 
perspective is notoriously difficult. Superior performance of teams with strong bonds rests on the 
premise that aspiring entrepreneurs choose partners with whom they have an existing relationship 
instead of what might seem more rational: seeking people with complementary skills. Ruef, Aldrich, 
and Carter (2003) have, for example, compared entrepreneurial team assembly mechanisms with 
randomly assembled teams that could have formed but did not. They find that “[F]ounders of 
organizations appear more concerned with trust and familiarity, at this early stage, than with 
functional competence, leading to a ‘competency discount’ in founder recruitment.” (p. 217). This 
suggests that choosing team members may have a downside in that people let social expediency take 
precedence over business efficacy. This tendency to gravitate toward familiar faces is not restricted to 
entrepreneurial settings. Ingram and Morris (2007) organize a mixer for EMBA students where they 
trace people with RFID tags to see which people interact. Their findings suggest that despite the 
participants’ claimed motivation of expanding their network by establishing new ties, the vast 
majority failed to do so. Instead, they interacted with their friends. Even within larger organizations, 
with well-established organizational hierarchies, there is room for employee choice in professional 
interactions (Kleinbaum, Stuart, and Tushman, 2013). 
6 
While it has been shown that people who are given the option of choosing their own team 
members are possibly more inclined to choose people they know over strangers, the effect of such a 
choice on performance can have divergent effects. For one, familiarity with team members might 
reduce the necessity of getting accustomed to everybody’s modus operandi, thus saving valuable time 
that can instead be spent on the task at hand. In addition, working with people you deliberately choose 
to work with raises social expectations within the group, leading team members to exert more effort, 
which would translate to better performance. 
Choosing ideas 
It has been popular in recent years to hail the people on a team as being more important than the idea 
per se. This notion, popularized by Reis’ (2011) book, has ignited interest among entrepreneurs and 
venture capitalists, even if rigorous empirical evidence supporting this notion is hard to come by. 
Separating the effect of an idea from other factors is not trivial, as an idea shapes a new 
venture – from its inception to its implementation. Some research looks at how an early version of 
ideas translates into market success (Goldenberg et al., 2001, Astebro, 2003), but this work often 
captures entrepreneurs who are well into the process. For instance, Goldenberg et al. (2001) study 
patents and case studies from published books to disentangle why some ideas are more likely to 
succeed. However, once patents and being mentioned in a book can be observed, there has already 
been a fair deal of weeding out of ideas. Along the same lines, Kornish and Ulrich (2014) emphasize 
the importance of separating the raw idea from the work that teams put into advancing the idea. They 
use data from Quirky, a crowdsourcing platform that organizes weekly tournaments for product ideas 
where some ideas are then selected and brought to market, to show that the raw idea has a large effect 
on the final outcome. Ideas, it seems, do matter. 
Entrepreneurship differs from paid employment in that entrepreneurs have greater autonomy 
to choose the ideas that they wish to work on. A key feature of how organizations work is task 
division and task allocation, whereby managers tell subordinates what to do (see e.g., Puranam et al., 
2013), providing limited opportunity for employees to choose the ideas they would like to work on. 
Because of inefficiency and coordination problems, organizations typically assign employees to tasks 
(Fama and Jensen, 1983). At the same time, the ability of employees to self-select ideas has been 
argued to be a major source of intrinsic motivation (Lovas and Ghoshal, 2000). For instance, 
Thompson (2000) notes that the more authority team members have to manage their own work, the 
more likely they are to be motivated and involved in their work. 
This has lead startups such as Github, Valve, Oticon, and Google to experiment with giving 
people the mandate to self-select the ideas they want to work on. Having the autonomy to choose 
ideas to work on may thus increase performance by getting people more attached to the ideas they are 
working on. In their study of the Danish hearing aid company, Oticon, that allowed for employees to 
choose the ideas they wanted to work on, Lovas and Ghoshal (2000) note: “this created an internal 
7 
ecological environment where employees competed to join and stay with the most interesting projects, 
and the people responsible for a strategic initiative competed to attract and retain the most talented 
individuals.” So, rather than being assigned ideas to work on, employees were now being given the 
choice to initiate new ideas to work on, and to join those ideas that they like. In a critical examination 
of Oticon, Foss (2001) notes how employees suddenly had the authority to work “just like 
entrepreneurs in a market setting.” While Oticon has since moved away from their complete bottom-
up approach, the concept of employees coming up with their own projects is still intact in many 
entrepreneurial settings. 
Choosing teams and ideas 
We have thus far considered having the ability to choose teams and ideas separately, but these can be 
pursued in tandem by giving people the ability to choose 
both
teams 
and
ideas. There are two 
competing explanations for how permitting more choice would affect performance. 
One stream of literature on autonomy suggests that more freedom to explore options 
positively
affects creative performance (Hackman, 2002). This situation is often observed in real life, 
where potential entrepreneurs choose 
both
their teams 
and
their ideas. This environment provides the 
largest scope for selection, with few formalized structures that constrain choices. The freedom of 
choice that this affords should – if this argument is right – translate into higher performance. 
Another line of work offers a competing argument, that too much choice can be 
detrimental
to performance. Simon (1955) famously argued that maximizing behavior, which requires assessing 
all possible choices, strains the limits of human cognition. He argued that in the presence of such 
psychic costs, satisficing – making an acceptable rather than an optimal choice – may well result in 
higher efficiency. This idea has been taken up in more recent empirical work on the “paradox of 
choice” (Schwartz, 2004), which argues that even though some choice is good it does not necessarily 
imply that more choice is better. Because people are reluctant to give up options and seek to explore 
the ones they have in detail, this literature argues that having a wide range of choices diminishes the 
quality of decisions and even individual well-being (Iyengar and Lepper 2000; Botti and Iyengar 
2004; Fasolo et al., 2007). Teams, thus overwhelmed “too much” choice, may feel paralyzed 
overloaded. This, in turn, may translate to lower performance (Iyengar and Lepper 2000). 
THE EXPERIMENT 
In order to explore the effect of choice along these two dimensions – teams and ideas – on 
entrepreneurial performance, we conduct a natural field experiment. The experiment itself took place 
in the Business and Entrepreneurship course at Technische Universität Hamburg (TUHH), a large 
8 
public university in Hamburg, Germany.
1
The university offers a three-year (six-semester) 
undergraduate degree in various engineering majors, with business as a minor in the curriculum. All 
undergraduate students at TUHH attend a mandatory, introductory, semester-long Business and 
Entrepreneurship course at some stage during their undergraduate study. This course is offered each 
semester and our experiment took place in three successive semesters – referred to hereafter as 
“cohorts” – in 2016 and 2017. The Business and Entrepreneurship course is divided between lectures 
and tutorials. Lectures are conducted by a variety of different professors who cover their area of 
expertise. All students attend the same lecture component but are divided into smaller groups for 
tutorials. The experiment took place in the context of the tutorial component of this course, during 
which students, organized in entrepreneurial teams, worked on developing and pitching business 
ideas. 
Semesters are 11 weeks long, and 90-minute tutorials take place once a week. Each tutorial is 
run by one student and one experienced entrepreneur. We will refer to this student-entrepreneur pair 
as “tutors” hereafter. In order to prevent experimental effects and in keeping with standard practice in 
natural field experiments, tutors were unaware of the experiment. In order to accommodate for the 
large number of students, the same tutorial is taught simultaneously in multiple rooms where each pair 
of tutors repeats the same tutorial twice on the same weekday, to two different groups of students: 
once in an “early session” and once in a “late session.” In cohort 1, there were four tutor pairs 
teaching a total of eight sessions. Cohorts 2 and 3 had 10 tutor pairs each, amounting to 20 sessions 
each. There were between six and nine student teams in each session. 
In tutorials, tutors guide teams of students through the development of an entrepreneurial 
pitch deck. As we discuss later, this pitch deck forms the basis upon which entrepreneurial 
performance will be evaluated. The pitch deck is aimed at hypothetical venture capitalists and closely 
resembles the document real entrepreneurs have to produce in order to get venture funding. It 
provides an in-depth understanding of the idea, its feasibility, target market, and projected revenue. 
Over the course of the semester, students develop their pitch deck and in the last session, students give 
a presentation of their final pitch deck. 
* INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE *
We implemented a two-by-two experimental design described in Table 1. In the 
team
treatment dimension, students were able to either choose their own team or they were assigned to a 
team of three members.
2
In the 
idea
treatment dimension, students were able to either choose their 
own idea or they were randomly assigned to work on one of 15 pre-determined ideas. 
1
A pre-analysis plan was registered with the American Economic Association RCT register. This is available 
upon request but to preserve the anonymity in the review process it cannot be cited here. Ethics approval was 
obtained from TUHH prior to the experiment. 
2
In total, 96.5% of the teams had 3 members, 3.9% had 4, and 0.6% had 2. 4-member teams were necessary to 
balance out participant numbers not divisible by 3; 4 students decided they would rather work in 2 teams of 2 
than 1 team of 4. Our results are robust to the exclusion of 2 and/or 4-member teams. 
9 
Students were randomly assigned to one of the four treatment groups. In order to ensure 
adherence to treatment assignment and minimize contamination or experimental effects, the four 
treatment groups were separated by time and space. Temporal separation was accomplished on the 
basis of early versus late time slots. The physical environment allowed for spatial separation since 
five tutorial classrooms were in the west wing of the building, and five were in the east wing, with 
doors on either side of a stairwell separating the two wings. Appendix A gives an example of this 
temporal and spatial division for cohort 3.
3
Appendix B provides an overview of what was covered in all 11 tutorial sessions. Depending 
on their random treatment assigned, students were informed of the room and time their tutorial would 
take place. Keeping with the example of cohort 3 in Appendix A, this means that students in the 
Choose both
treatment had their tutorials during the early time slot in the west wing of the building 
with tutors 1 to 5. 
Choose team
students were in the east wing at the same time with tutors 6 to 10. 
Students with no choice in the team dimension were assigned to the late time slot, with the 
Choose 
idea
tutorials taking place in the west wing with tutors 1 to 5 and 
Choose neither
tutorials taking place 
in the east wing with tutors 6 to10. In our regressions, we use tutor fixed effects to capture systematic 
differences between them. 
In week one, tutorials were dedicated to team formation. During the early session, all students 
were informed in their room by their tutor that they would have the opportunity to self-select into 
teams of three. Their choice was limited to only people in the same part of the building (i.e., people in 
the same treatment). All doors between the east and west wings of the building were closed and 
guarded by one of the tutors so as to ensure no mixing of treatments. Once all tutors had completed 
their introduction, students were released to the hallway to find suitable team members. Every two 
minutes we sounded a bell to encourage students to change partners and talk to new people. Once 
three people agreed to be in a team together, they went to a tutor of their choice and put down their 
names. We ensured that all rooms had approximately the same number of teams by closing rooms that 
had reached a maximum capacity of nine teams. Team formation lasted for approximately half an 
hour in all three cohorts. Students in the treatments with team assignment (the late time slot in our 
example) were simply informed of their team members by their tutor in their designated room. We 
show later that the teams are balanced across treatments. The composition of these teams was 
completely randomized. 
In week two, tutorials were dedicated to idea formation. Teams without choice in the idea 
dimension were situated in the east wing. At the beginning of the tutorial, tutors handed out the 
3
Students have historically had no systematic preference for particular time slots. (The earliest slot starts at 9:45 
a.m. and the last one ends at 5:15 p.m., so the hours are not inconvenient for full-time students.) The classrooms 
in the east and west wings are also comparable. Nevertheless, in order to avoid any systematic differences 
between treatment groups, we randomized the temporal and spatial allocation of treatment groups across 
cohorts, such that each treatment group was in at least 2 different locations and 2 different time slots over the 
course of our experiment. 
10 
randomly assigned idea to each team.
4
Assigned ideas were sketched out on one page. To deter 
students from copying from one another, we provided 15 different ideas and no idea was repeated 
within a given room; Appendix H provides an overview of all 15 ideas. Each of these ideas was 
extensively pre-tested to ensure both a high quality and fit with the objectives of the course. Teams 
with choice in the idea dimension were situated in the west wing. During their second tutorial, they 
were guided through an idea generation process by their tutors. The students were given complete 
freedom in their choice but had to meet three criteria: (1) their idea had to solve a problem or add 
value, (2) there needed to be a potential target market, and (3) there had to be a way to generate 
revenue through the sale of the product or service. Ideas and their respective products or services 
could be adjusted over the course of the class. 
The final outcome for each team was a pitch deck comprising a maximum of 10 slides. Other 
than this, no formal restrictions were placed on the students. 
Evaluation 
In order to avoid experimenter effects and mimic real-life entrepreneurial situations, pitches were 
evaluated by practitioners. We had 40 such evaluators, who were practicing entrepreneurs, business 
angels or venture capitalists with, on average, more than 25 previous pitch deck evaluations and 0.875 
founded companies per evaluator. Table 2 summarizes relevant characteristics pertaining to 
evaluators’ expertise. In order to account for systematic variation across evaluators, each pitch deck 
was scored by three separate evaluators. As a deterrent to negative selection – for example, attracting 
unsuccessful entrepreneurs in need of money – evaluators did not receive monetary compensation. 
Instead, we organized the evaluation effort as an entrepreneurship event. The event began with 
minimal social interaction and the distribution of the pitch decks with instructions for the evaluation. 
Names and pictures of the people in the team were redacted to ensure that pitch decks were evaluated 
based on merit alone. The evaluators were instructed not to talk to one another and were supervised in 
order to ensure that there was no communication. Once the evaluations were completed, three keynote 
lectures took place. At the end of the event, participants had the opportunity to network over an 
informal wine tasting. 
* INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE *
For the evaluation, all evaluators were given a verbal and a written explanation (see Appendix 
I) of the procedure. The evaluation took place in a large office building where every evaluator had 
their own spot at a large table. The evaluation took place in three stages. First, general information on 
the evaluator and his or her experience in the field was collected in a written survey. 
Second, each pitch deck was individually evaluated. For this purpose, all pitch decks were 
printed out, with an evaluation form as the front sheet (see Appendix I). Each evaluator was given a 
4
Only one team refused to work on their assigned idea. They were given a different idea from the original list of 
15. Our results are robust to the exclusion of this team from the sample. 
11 
set of either 23 or 24 pitch decks. Pitch decks were randomly assigned to evaluators using a 
customized assignment problem algorithm such that: (1) the same pitch deck was not evaluated by the 
same person twice; (2) the same assigned idea (of the 15 such ideas) was not evaluated by the same 
person twice, and (3) each person evaluated an equal number of pitch decks from all four treatments. 
We added a second heuristic approach by randomizing the order of the pitch decks each evaluator 
received. This avoids temporal effects such as being less generous as time progresses (Danziger, 
Levav and Avnaim-Pesso, 2011). 
The evaluator had to assess each pitch desk on a 7-point Likert scale according to five 
separate criteria: (1) novelty, (2) feasibility, (3) market potential, (4) the implementation as a pitch 
deck, and (5) the evaluator’s interest in the idea. Next, the evaluators had to determine (1) the 
likelihood of inviting this team for a follow-up meeting, and (2) the idea’s potential for success as a 
startup based on the pitch deck as a percentage measure. Third, once all pitch decks had been 
evaluated individually, the evaluators had a budget of one million fictional dollars to distribute among 
the pitch decks. For this, we printed out stickers of fictional bills with the sum of one million and we 
provided a field to stick these onto on the evaluation sheet of each pitch deck (see Appendix I). 
Evaluators could choose to spend some, none, or their entire budget. This budgeting allowed for a 
direct comparison between the pitch decks and closely mimics the decisions of real-life venture 
capitalists. 
These evaluation measurements constitute our performance metrics. The evaluation criteria 
were derived from previous works by Maxwell et al. (2011) and Dean et al. (2006), and pre-tested. 
The evaluation concluded with a short exit survey asking the evaluators to judge the overall quality of 
the pitch decks, and self-assess their qualification to perform such evaluations on a 7-point Likert 
scale. We account for evaluator as well as order fixed effects in our analyses. 
DATA 
A total of 940 students enrolled in this class over three cohorts – 173 students in the first cohort, 408 
in the second, and 359 in the third. Of these 940 students, 27 dropped out; dropouts were uncorrelated 
with treatment assignment. This left us with a final subject pool of 913 students constituting a total of 
310 teams, 300 of which had three members, 12 with four members and 2 with two members. 
To register for the class, participants had to fill out an online entry survey collecting 
information on their demographics, entrepreneurial experience, preferred team composition, and 
current skills (see Appendix F). After the final presentation in the last session, participants completed 
a written exit survey on their teamwork, happiness with the team and idea, new entrepreneurial skill 
development, and overall learning. Students were unaware that they were part of an experiment. The 
entry survey has a 100 percent response rate while 94.5 percent took the exit survey; non-response 
was uncorrelated with treatment assignment. 
12 
Table 3 provides summary statistics for relevant student characteristics, including 
demographic information, familiarity with entrepreneurship, and educational background. Our sample 
is balanced in terms of predetermined student characteristics across the four treatments; see Table 3. 
* INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE * 
In addition to balance checks regarding individual characteristics, we check the balance for 
ideas among those treatments which involve assignment idea (
Choose team
and 
Choose neither
). The 
results of a Pearson’s chi-squared test (X
2
=5.768, p=0.972) show a balanced assignment of ideas, 
allaying fears that any difference in treatment effects across these two groups is driven by differences 
in the assigned idea 
per se
. Furthermore, Pearson’s chi-squared tests show that both the assignment of 
the four treatments to the 40 evaluators (X
2
=41.749, p=1), and the 15 assigned ideas to evaluators 
(X
2
=141.52, p=1) are random. Our previously described algorithm further ensured that no evaluator 
assessed the same project or assigned idea multiple times. 
Variables 
Dependent variables. 
For our analysis, we focus on four dependent variables. These come 
from the evaluation criteria described earlier, namely 
novelty
, 
market potential,
success potential,
and 
investment
. Apart from information on the founding team (which were redacted on the pitch decks in 
order to avert bias) prior work describes these as driving funding decisions made by business angels 
and venture capitalists (e.g., Carpentier and Suret, 2015; Maxwell et al., 2001).
5
Novelty captures how new the particular idea is; and it is measured on a 7-point Likert scale. 
Market potential is also measured on the same scale and reflects the idea’s revenue generation 
potential. Success potential is measured as a percentage that reflects the evaluator’s assessment of 
how likely it is that the idea will turn into a successful startup. Finally, investment is measured as the 
amount of money an evaluator allocates to this startup out of the one-million-dollar budget. 
Independent variables. 
Our main goal is to uncover how the ability to choose team members 
and/or business ideas affects entrepreneurial performance. Our baseline regression specification 
therefore includes three dummy variables – 
Choose team
, 
Choose idea
, and 
Choose both
– with 
Choose neither
as the exclusion. 
Estimation 
Estimation of treatment effects is straightforward in the context of randomized experiments. At its 
most basic, it involves a comparison of means across the different treatments. In our empirical 
analysis, we further account for potential differences in across time, instruction, and evaluation by 
including fixed effects for cohorts, tutors, order in which the pitch deck was evaluated, and the 
evaluators themselves.
6
We rely on OLS for our main results due to its ease of interpretation, but 
5
Please refer to appendices A and B for results of all other evaluation categories. 
6
In each cohort, each (pair of) tutors was responsible for two tutorial sections – meaning they had students from 
two different treatments. Tutors were deliberately switched every cohort. Nevertheless, given that 23 tutors were 
13 
show in robustness checks that the results are similar when using ordered probits or logits for our 
ordinal dependent variables. 
In order to permit the inclusion of evaluator fixed effects, our unit of analysis is the team-
evaluator; including these evaluations separately is important since prior research has found that there 
is large variation in the assessment of early stage ideas (see Boudreau et al., 2016, for a similar 
approach). This leaves us with 930 (310 projects * 3 evaluations per project) observations. In order to 
account for potential correlation with the outcomes, all our standard error estimates are clustered at 
the team and the evaluator level. 
RESULTS 
Main results 
We begin by comparing mean outcomes across the four treatments, corrected for cohort, tutor, 
evaluation order, and evaluators fixed effects. These corrected means mirror those in the raw data, but 
we include these fixed effects throughout our analysis in order to avoid the possibility that these 
factors may be reflected in our treatment effect estimates. 
Figure 1, which presents these (corrected) means along with their 95% confidence intervals, 
captures our main results. For all the four main outcomes – novelty, market potential, success 
potential and investment – the baseline treatment with no choice of either team members or idea 
(
Choose neither
) results the lowest performance. Being able to choose the idea but not one’s team 
(
Choose idea
), by contrast, consistently results in the highest performance. The performance of 
treatment groups in which teams could choose their members but not the idea (
Choose team
) or 
choose along both dimensions, have statistically similar performance outcomes, somewhere in 
between the 
Choose neither
and 
Choose idea
treatment groups. 
* INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE *
Table 4 presents OLS coefficient estimates for the following baseline regression: 
𝑦
!"
= 𝛽
!
+ 𝛽
!
𝐶ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚
!
+ 𝛽
!
𝐶ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑎
!
+ 𝛽
!
(𝐶ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑏𝑜𝑡ℎ)
!
+ 𝛾
!
+ 𝜀
!"
where 
y
ij
denotes the performance (outcome) of team 
i
as assessed by evaluator 
j
; 
𝛾
!
is a vector of 
fixed effects capturing systematic differences in performance across teams by cohort, tutor, evaluation 
order, and evaluator. 
Choose team
, 
Choose idea
, and 
Choose both
are dummy variables equal to one 
for teams in the corresponding treatment group; the baseline (exclusion) is the 
Choose neither
treatment. The 
𝛽
’s in this regression capture the difference in performance for the corresponding 
treatment group relative to 
Choose neither
. They provide a quantitative estimate of the difference in 
the respective means for the three choice treatments relative to the 
Choose neither
baseline. Standard 
responsible for tutoring 310 teams, tutors were not balanced across treatments. We therefore control for tutor 
fixed effects in our estimations. 
14 
errors are clustered at the team and evaluator level across four different performance measures: 
novelty, market potential, success potential, and investment. 
Table 4 underscores the results from Figure 1. The 
Choose team
treatment weakly 
outperforms the baseline no choice treatment, resulting in 10.83% increase in performance as 
measured by market potential (p<0.05); a 26.92% in terms of success potential (p<0.10); and a 
119.54% increase in terms of investment allocation (p<0.10). However, teams which get to choose 
their members alone do not do significantly better than teams that get to choose 
both
their ideas 
and
members (p>0.10 for all four performance measures), and they do significantly worse than teams that 
are able to choose 
only
their idea (p<0.01 for novelty, p<0.05 for market potential, success potential, 
investment). It seems, based on these results that having 
some
choice results in better outcomes than 
having 
no 
choice. On its own, team choice alone weakly outperforms no choice; at the same time, it 
detracts from performance when permitted in conjunction with idea choice. 
By contrast, allowing teams to choose 
only
their own ideas has an unambiguously positive 
effect on entrepreneurial performance. The 
Choose idea
treatment is a clear “winner” in this 
horserace: it results in a statistically significant (p<0.01) increase in performance relative to the no 
choice baseline across all four dimensions (+25.96% for novelty, +20.66% for market potential, 
+52.73% for success potential, and +279.47% for investment). Furthermore, it outperforms the 
Choose team
(see above) and 
Choose both
(p<0.01 for market potential and success potential, p<0.10 
for novelty and investment) treatments; having 9.70% more novel ideas, an increase of 12.24% in 
market potential and 26.78% in success potential, and 40.59% more money invested (compared to 
Choose team)
. 
Lastly, we can clear the confusion of past research as to how allowing entrepreneurs the 
freedom to choose both their team and their idea affects performance. The 
Choose both
treatment 
outperforms the 
Choose neither
baseline when it comes to novelty and investment (p<0.05; +13.74% 
and +125.44% respectively), but not when it comes to market or success potential. Interestingly, 
teams perform no better when they are permitted choice on both dimensions than when they are only 
allowed to choose team members; and they do significantly better when they are restricted in terms of 
the choice of team members. 
* INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE * 
What seems to matter most for performance in this setting is not 
whether
one has choice, but 
what
the choice pertains to and 
how much
choice one has. We explore this in greater detail by 
estimating the following factor model: 
𝑦
!"
= 𝛿
!
+ 𝛿
!
𝑇𝑒𝑎𝑚 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠
!
+ 𝛿
!
𝐼𝑑𝑒𝑎 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠
!
+ 𝛿
!
𝑇𝑒𝑎𝑚 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠
!
×(𝐼𝑑𝑒𝑎 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠)
!
+ 𝛾
!
+ 𝜀
!"
where 
Team choice treatments
is a dummy variable equal to 1 for treatments in which teams are 
allowed to choose members (i.e. the 
Choose team
and 
Choose both
treatments in the original 
15 
specification); 
Idea choice treatments
is a dummy variable equal to 1 for treatments in which teams 
are allowed to choose ideas (i.e. the 
Choose idea
and 
Choose both
treatments in the original 
specification); the interaction term is the same as 
Choose both
in the baseline model. This model is 
structurally equivalent to the baseline model presented earlier. What changes is the interpretation of 
the coefficients. More specifically, this specification allows us to explore how the simple matter of 
choice along the team composition and idea dimensions affects performance. 
Table 5, presents OLS estimates for the parameters in this equation. The results of this 
experiment become really interesting when interpreting the interaction between our two treatment 
dimensions. Team choice alone results in a marginally significant increase in performance in three of 
the four measures. What drives performance, however, is the ability to choose one’s own idea: the 
estimate for 
𝛿
!
is positive and statistically significant across all specifications. The coefficient for the 
interaction term, 
𝛿
!
, by contrast, is negative and statistically significant across 3 of the 4 performance 
measures. This indicates that allowing for the choice of team members 
in addition
to the choice of 
idea actually hurts performance. Participants might be overwhelmed by too much choice. In other 
words, for teams that work on a chosen idea, random teams perform better than those were people 
find their collaborators. 
* INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE * 
Specification Checks 
In this section, we report the results of specification checks, which address three main concerns. First, 
a natural question to ask in view of our key finding is whether assigned ideas performed better than 
endogenously generated ideas simply because the assigned ideas were of poor quality. In order to 
allay this concern, we compared the quality of all ideas –both assigned and chosen. We find no 
statistically significant differences in idea quality for all but one of the assigned topics. In addition, we 
re-estimated the regressions above, excluding the teams that were assigned to this “bad idea”. The 
results are robust to this exclusion. 
Second, although we explore performance along 4 salient dimensions, there are other ways in 
which performance can be measured. As a second specification check, we explore whether our main 
results change when performance is measured along two other evaluation criteria: feasibility and 
invitation probability (capturing how likely the evaluator is to invite the team for a meeting). The 
results, presented in Appendix C and D, confirm our main results. 
Finally, although we report OLS estimates in our main results for ease of interpretation, the 
fact that they are limited dependent variables do technically warrant different estimation methods. We 
deal with this by estimating Tobit and ordered Probit models. The results, presented Appendix E, 
confirm our main results. 
16 
Understanding how choice matters 
In our experiment, we find that choice matters. Our first main finding is that having 
some
choice 
typically results in better team performance. Table 4 reveals positive treatment effects for each of the 
three treatments that allow one or more dimensions of choice relative to the no choice baseline. This 
finding is not terribly surprising: While it is nice to have experimental confirmation of the intuition 
that some choice is going to enhance performance relative to having no choice whatsoever, one could 
have been fairly confident that this prior would have been borne out in the data, in view of the extant 
literature on entrepreneurship. 
Our second main finding is that the 
Choose idea
treatment strictly dominates all other 
treatments across the gamut of performance measures. This finding is striking given that subjects who 
weren’t given the option of choosing team members were randomly assigned to teams. It implies that 
that if teams are allowed to develop their own ideas, you would generate better outcomes by 
determining team composition through the roll of a die than by deliberately selecting team members. 
In this section, we try to shed further light on our results, with an eye to the channels the 
literature – reviewed earlier -- has suggested. We derived five channels, elaborated upon below, that 
colors team performance when choice is involved: (1) homophily, (2) sorting, (3) network, (4) 
teamwork, and (5) satisfaction. Our aim is to understand how allowing for choice may generate 
different “kinds” of teams which, in turn, has ramifications for entrepreneurial performance. 
Homophily.
A potential challenge with allowing choice is that teams that get the freedom to 
choose their members might let homophily drive their decisions; meaning they choose to work with 
people who are similar to them in gender, age, ethnic and educational background (McPherson et al., 
2001). If homophily takes precedence over other factors then this can ultimately shape performance 
(Ertug et al., 2018). Testing this assumption in Table 7, we find that the 
Choose team
and 
Choose 
Both 
treatments cause more homogeneous teams with regards to gender (p<.05), variety of studies 
(p<.01) and the semester when they joined the university (p<.05 and p<.01) to form. To put these 
coefficients in perspective, this implies that teams that were formed by choice are 34% less gender 
diverse compared to randomly formed ones. Similarly, variety of studies is 31% lower and variety of 
semesters is 69% lower.
There is no difference between the treatments in age diversity and 
nationalities, possibly because there is little variation in age among our participants, and they are 
mostly German students. 
Sorting.
Closely related to homophily is sorting, which is also based on the assumption that 
birds of a feather flock together. However, for sorting, we consider characteristics that are not readily 
observable; but rather explain a person’s prior attitude to the class and entrepreneurship in general 
(such as academic performance, prior confidence, and entrepreneurial efficacy). If sorting is in effect, 
very high and very low performing and aspiring teams will form, hence possibly cancelling out any 
17 
treatment effects. Table 8 shows that chosen teams in the 
Choose team
and 
Choose both 
treatments 
cause more homogeneous teams are more homogeneous with regards to their intent – but not efficacy 
- on becoming an entrepreneur in the future. We find no support for sorting on ability as chosen teams 
have no different disparity in academic performance than the other teams. Our results suggest that 
teams that are formed by choice to have 19% separation in entrepreneurial intent as opposed to 
randomly formed ones that had 22%. In other words, this seems to rule out a skill sorting argument, 
and rather point in the direction that people choose others that have similar entrepreneurial intent. 
Network.
As the literature on entrepreneurial teams has argued, prior friendship or family ties 
can guide people’s choice in forming a team. While prior ties can be positive in reducing frictions 
among people (Raegans, 2016), it can also lead to complacency in forming a team where people are 
friends rather than setting out to achieve a goal (Ruef et al., 2003). In line with past literature, stating 
that entrepreneurs often choose friends and family to become their business partners, we expect that 
our experiment participants will form teams with people they already have ties with when given the 
opportunity. Before the experiment, we asked people to name up to five people they would like to 
work with (team member wishes); representing particularly strong ties. Table 9 shows that more of 
these wishes are realized in treatments 
Choose both
(p<.01) and 
Choose team 
(p<.01). The magnitude 
of the coefficient suggest that they are 94% more likely to have fulfilled team wishes. Similarly, we 
find that team members are 80% more acquainted with their team members in treatments 
Choose both
(p<.01) and 
Choose team 
(p<.01). This points in the direction that people may choose friends rather 
than the best possible collaborators for their team. 
Teamwork.
After the teams have been formed, we examine how well the teams worked 
together as a group. In our reasoning with the benefits of choice is that it may allow teams to divide 
their work more efficiently. Again, the natural assumption is that teams who want to work together 
will do so more smoothly. We use both observed actions during the class (attendance, leaving a team) 
as well as self-reported data on team cohesion and work put into the project as measures for this 
mechanism. For this, we use the exit survey where we ask people about their project after the 
experiment. Table 10 shows that there are some differences between the 
Choose team
and 
Choose 
both
treatments with respect to teamwork. The 
Choose team
treatment have 9% higher team 
collaboration than the baseline (p<.05) as well as 24% lower overstated workload (p<.05.). For 
Choose both
compared to 
Choose neither =
we find 24% lower disparity in attendance (p<.05), fewer 
people leave the project (p<.05, 74% less compared to 
Choose neither
), and collaboration is 7% 
higher (p<.01). In other words, these findings suggest that choosing a team lead to more motivation 
and a clear division of labor. Despite these potential upsides, however, such teams perform worse than 
the treatment group where teams are assigned and ideas are chosen. 
Satisfaction
. It is plausible that choice increase teams’ happiness, which in turn affects their 
performance. To assess this, we try to capture the teams’ self-assessment of their satisfaction with 
both their team, their idea, and their belief of how well they performed. The rationale here is that 
18 
freedom of choice will lead to happier individuals; and they might even become over-confident when 
tasked with judging their own performance. For this mechanism, it is sensible to look at the effects of 
both team and idea choice as they should only affect the aspect that people can choose. Table 11 
shows that 
Choose team
leads to 13% higher satisfaction with the team (p<.01) but has, as expected, 
no effect on the satisfaction of the idea. 
Choose both
leads to 8% higher satisfaction with the team 
(p<.01) as well as 22% higher satisfaction with the idea (p<.01). Choose idea results in 18% higher 
satisfaction with the idea (p<.01). The final two columns of Table 11 gauge the effect of choice on the 
judgement of the potential of their project, as well as the intention to pursue it afterwards. This reveals 
an important aspect of our experiment. Choose both has 23% higher self-evaluation of the project and 
39% higher intention to pursue the project in the future. What is worth noting here is that choice in 
both dimensions has a strong positive effect on the perceived potential as well as the likelihood of 
pursuing the project. This is despite the fact that this treatment performs consistently worse than the 
treatment 
Choose idea
: while choice makes people happier and likely to continue the project, this 
doesn’t not necessarily translate into higher performance. 
* INSERT TABLES 6-11 ABOUT HERE * 
Concluding our findings from the five channels, we find that chosen teams are more 
homogeneous, like-minded with respect to entrepreneurial intention, have stronger ties between team 
members, work together more cohesively, their members are happier with their peers and their 
performance, and are most likely to pursue the project in the future. However, as shown previously, 
these teams perform worse than those that choose 
idea
but not team. 
DISCUSSION 
We began this paper with the simple yet important question of how the choice of team members and 
ideas affect entrepreneurial performance. While there is ample research on entrepreneurial teams (see 
e.g., Ruef et al., 2003), such research suffers from the difficulty of making causal inference. Building 
upon recent research (see e.g., Hoogendoorn et al., 2017) and tackling these challenges, we designed a 
two-by-two field experiment involving 900+ participants and over 300 teams. Subjects were 
randomly assigned to one of four treatments in which they (i) chose 
both
their team and the idea to 
pursue; (ii) chose their own team members but 
not
the idea; (iii) chose their own idea but 
not
their 
team; or (iv) chose 
neither
their team 
nor
the idea. We find that teams who chose their own idea but 
not
their members performed consistently better than those in the remaining treatments. In the pre-
protocol uploaded to American Economic Association, we elaborated on the hypotheses we sought to 
test, and outlined that expectations are theoretically ambiguous, but that leaning toward that choice 
should increase performance. 
One of the most important findings is what we did 
not
find. The null finding that choice of 
teams has 
no
effect on entrepreneurial team performance runs against what many scholars would 
suggest, as choice in team members could potentially facilitate complementarity between team 
19 
members as well as reduce coordination costs (Kotha et al., 2015). Indeed, this implies that people 
were not better than 
random
in choosing their team members. In assessing why this is the case, we 
compared a few potential mechanisms that can account for this finding. We found that endogenously 
chosen teams were more homophilous on almost all dimensions we could measure and that they use 
pre-existing networks to a greater extent than others. We also showed that people’s happiness 
increased from choice of team members, but this does not translate into higher performance (with the 
exception of higher market potential for the 
Choose team
treatment). This is an important finding in 
light of much recent discussions from practitioners who hail the team as the most important ingredient 
of entrepreneurial success (see e.g., Blank, 2013). If people cannot pick collaborators better than by 
random selection then perhaps one should not have too much confidence that teams can self-assemble 
and achieve high performance. This can potentially explain a well-known empirical puzzle in 
entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurs have low average returns (albeit are over-represented in the tails of 
the distribution) (Hamilton, 2000), yet often persist as entrepreneurs. One explanation is that 
entrepreneurs prefer autonomy and are thus willing to forsake part of their income (Moskowitz and 
Vissing-Jørgensen, 2002). Our results show that by providing more autonomy to choosing both teams 
and ideas, people in this treatment grow happier, they believe their idea has potential, and are much 
more likely to pursue it in the future. Interestingly though, we find that these people perform 
consistently 
worse
than those people who can 
only
choose their idea. An implication that stems from 
this insight is that teams that have the ability to choose ideas do better when working with random 
people rather than the ones they have chosen. In line with what our additional tests show, this suggests 
that people may be too complacent when forming teams and may have a difficult time finding good 
matches. 
Choosing ideas matters for performance: teams that endogenously choose the idea they 
wanted to work on consistently showed higher performance. This finding contributes to the discussion 
of the relative importance of ideas pointed out by Kornish and Ullrich (2014), who study teams in 
very early stages of entrepreneurship. As we rule out the possibility that the predefined ideas may 
have been worse than endogenously formed ones in our robustness checks, this suggests that more 
autonomy in the creative process of forming an idea positively affects performance. 
The treatment condition where people choose their idea, but not the team, shows the highest 
performance. This runs against the notion that greater choice is better. There are several possible 
explanations for this finding. For one, the topic of “too much choice” has been thoroughly discussed 
in other streams of literature (Fasolo et al., 2007; Scheibehenne et al., 2009). Giving participants the 
freedom to choose along multiple dimensions might make the task of developing a business plan – a 
task that is highly complex to begin with – even 
too
complex. Overwhelmed participants might not 
have been able to reasonably allocate their resources, thus slacking in overall performance. Another 
possible explanation is how randomly assigned teams work together. We have shown that deliberately 
chosen teams are more cohesive, homogeneous, and happier. But we cannot show that this cohesion 
20 
and happiness leads to a better performance. It stands to reason that the focus of a high performing 
team should not be on happiness, but rather on effective working relationships with a clear division of 
labor (Hoogendoorn et al., 2017). Working with people you do not go for after-work drinks with 
likely shifts the focus purely onto work, leading to a higher performance. 
The findings can be of particular interest to the “professionalization of entrepreneurship,” 
namely highly funded incubator and accelerator programs. Contrary to current popular approaches, 
where aspiring entrepreneurs are presented with choices in both dimensions (Y-Combinator) or 
neither dimension (Rocket Internet), the way to success might lie in the third path: Assigning teams 
but letting them freely choose their idea. This prevents people from choosing based on homophily and 
pre-existing friendship ties. While this makes team happier as we show in our supplementary analysis, 
it may diverse and conflicting views to arise that are necessary when bringing an idea forward. Our 
findings thus point in the direction of how random teams prevent an echo chamber to form where 
thoughts are recycled but not advanced. 
Limitations and future research
In setting up a field experiment and using a pre-protocol, we are able to draw causal inference without 
p-hacking our results. Still, there are several limitations. 
One important challenge is the external validity in the context of mimicking all aspects of real 
startup teams. Given that we need a relatively large sample at the team-level to uncover significant 
effects, we used students from a class who had to produce a pitch deck that was later evaluated by real 
investors and entrepreneurs. As is the case of other field experiments on entrepreneurial teams (see 
Hoogendoorn et al., 2013; 2017), relying on students means that we include highly educated people 
with relatively limited experience. 
Another challenge of field experiments is the possibility of contamination between treatment 
groups. The experiment lasted over several weeks, and people from different teams could potentially 
talk to one another. Given that we separated the experimental conditions in time and space, we have 
sought to minimize this problem. In addition, the tutors who helped the students were not informed 
about either the conditions or the hypotheses we sought to test with the field experiment. 
Our approach compares teams with choice in choosing team members and ideas with those 
who do not have that choice. The control group thus consists of randomly formed teams and randomly 
allocated ideas. In real life, organizations do not form teams at random – they form teams in the hope 
of achieving superior performance. There are several ways in which such teams could form, such as 
through maximizing functional and social diversity (Lameez and van Knippenberg, 2014) or allowing 
team members to have some prior connections (Reagans et al., 2003). Rather than only comparing at 
random, future research would be able to compare different such baselines to see which matters most. 
The obvious difficulty is in getting a large enough number of observations to be able to detect 
meaningful effect sizes. In fact, prior work on entrepreneurial teams investigated a much smaller 
number with around 50 teams (Hoogendoorn et al., 2017). This implies that the effect size that can be 
21 
detected has to be of great magnitude. We pushed the entrepreneurial team literature here with 
designing a field experiment using 300 teams, which was a long and expensive effort. The upside is 
that it informs the entrepreneurial team literature by providing causal evidence of how choosing ideas 
and teams matter for performance. 
22 
REFERENCES 
Asterbro, T. 2003. The return to independent invention: Evidence of unrealistic optimism, risk 
seeking or skewness loving? 
The Economic Journal
, 113(484): 226-239. 
Becker, B. & Gassmann, O. 2006. Gaining leverage effects from knowledge modes within corporate 
incubators. 
R&D Management
, 36(1): 1-16. 
Beckman, C. M. & Burton, M. D. 2008. Founding the future: Path dependence in the evolution 
of top 
management teams from founding to IPO. 
Organization Science,
19(1): 3-24. 
Blank, S. 2013. 
The Four Steps to the Epiphany: Successful Strategies for Products that Win
. 
BookBaby. 
Brannon, D. L., Wiklund, J. & Haynie, J. M. 2013. The varying effects of family relationships in 
entrepreneurial teams. 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
, 37.1:
107-132.
Botti, S., & Iyengar, S.S. (2004). The psychological pleasure and pain of choosing: When people 
prefer choosing at the cost of subsequent outcome satisfaction. 
Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology
, 87, 312–326. 
Boudreau, K. J., Guinan, E. C., Lakhani, K. R., & Riedl, C. 2016. Looking across and looking beyond 
the knowledge frontier: Intellectual distance, novelty, and resource allocation in science. 
Management Science
, 62(10), 2765-2783. 
Briscoe, G., 2014. Digital innovation: The hackathon phenomenon. 
Burgers, J. H., & Covin, J. G. 2016. The contingent effects of differentiation and integration on 
corporate entrepreneurship. 
Strategic Management Journal
, 37.3: 521-540. 
Carpentier, C. & Suret, J.M. 2015. Angel group members' decision process and rejection criteria: A 
longitudinal analysis. 
Journal of Business Venturing
, 
30
(6), 808-821. 
Chung, S., Lount, R. & Park, H. 2016. Do friends perform better?: A meta-analytic review of 
friendship and group task performance. 
Academy of Management Proceedings
, 
2016(1): 17681. 
Clarysse, B, & Moray, N. 2004. A process study of entrepreneurial team formation: the case of a 
research-based spin-off. 
Journal of Business Venturing
, 19.1: 55-79. 
Cohen, S. 2013. What do accelerators do? Insights from incubators and angels. 
I n n o v a t i o n s
, 8: 19-
25. 
Cooper, A.C. & Bruno, A.V. 1977. Success among high-technology firms. 
Business Horizons
, 
20
(2): 16-22. 
Cooper, D.J. & Saral, K.J. 2013. Entrepreneurship and team participation: An experimental study. 
European Economic Review
, 
59
: 126-140. 
Dahlander, L. & McFarland, D. A. 2013. Ties that last: Tie formation and persistence in research 
collaborations over time. 
Administrative Science Quarterly
, 58(1): 69-110. 
Danziger, S., Levav, J., & Avnaim-Pesso, L. 2011. Extraneous factors in judicial decisions. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
A m erica
, 108: 6889–6892. 
Dean, D. L., Hender, J. M., Rodgers T. M. & Santanen, E. 2006. Identifying good ideas: Constructs 
and scales for idea evaluation. 
Eesley, C., Hsu, D. & Roberts, E. 2014. The contingent effect of top management teams on venture 
performance: Aligning founding team composition with innovation strategy and 
commercialization environment. 
Strategic Management Journal
, 35(12): 1798-1817.
Ertug, G. and Castellucci, F. 2013. Getting what you need: How reputation and status affect team 
performance, hiring, and salaries in the NBA. 
Academy of Management Journal
, 
56
(2): 
407-431. 
Ertug, G. and Gargiulo, M. 2018. Homophily and Individual Performance. 
Organization Science 
(forthcoming). 
Fama, E. F. & Jensen, M. C. 1983. Separation of ownership and control. 
The Journal of Law and 
Econom ics
, 26(2), 301-325. 
Fasolo, B., McClelland, G. H. & Todd, P. M. 2007. Escaping the tyranny of choice: When fewer 
attributes make choice easier. 
Marketing Theory
, 7.1: 13-26. 
Feeser, H.R. & Willard, G.E. 1990. Founding strategy and performance: A comparison of high and 
low growth high tech firms. 
Strategic Management Hournal
, 
11
(2): 87-98. 
Foss, N.J. 2003. Selective intervention and internal hybrids: Interpreting and learning from the rise 
and decline of the Oticon spaghetti organization. 
Organization Science
, 
14
(3): 331-349. 
Girotra, K., Terwiesch, C., & Ulrich, K. T. 2010. Idea generation and the quality of the best 
idea. 
Management Science, 
56(4): 591-605. 
Goldenberg, J., Lehmann, D. R. & Mazursky, D. 2001. The idea itself and the circumstance of its 
emergence as predictors of new product success. 
Management Science
, 47: 69-84. 
23 
Grimaldi, R., & Grandi, A. 2015. Business incubators and new venture creation: An assessment of 
incubating models. 
Technovation
, 25(2): 111-121. 
Hackman, J. R. 2002. 
Leading Teams: Setting the Stage for Great Performances
. Harvard Business 
Press. 
Hamilton, B. H. 2000. Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical analysis of the returns to self-
employment. 
Journal of Political Economy
108(3): 604–31. 
Hansen, Z., Owan, H., & Pan, J. 2015. The impact of group diversity on class performance: evidence 
from college classrooms. 
Education Economics
, 23(2): 238-258. 
Hoogendoorn, S.M., Oosterbeek, H. & van Praag, M. C. 2013. The impact of gender diversity on the 
performance of business teams: Evidence from a field experiment. 
Management Science
, 
59(7): 1514-1528. 
Hoogendoorn, S.M., Parker, S. C. and van Praag, M. C. 2017. Smart or diverse start-up teams? 
Evidence from a field experiment. 
Organization Science
. 
Horwitz, S.K. & Horwitz, I.B. 2007. The effects of team diversity on team outcomes: A meta-analytic 
review of team demography. 
Journal of Management
, 
33
(6): 987-1015. 
Iyengar, S.S., & Lepper, M.R. (2000). When choice is demotivating: Can one desire too much of a 
good thing? 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
, 79, 995–1006. 
Ingram, P. & Morris, M.W. 2007. Do people mix at mixers? Structure, homophily, and the “life of the 
party”. 
Administrative Science Quarterly
, 
52
(4): 558-585. 
Isabelle, D. A. 2013. Key factors affecting a technology entrepreneur's choice of incubator or 
accelerator. 
Technology Innovation Management Review
, 3.2: 16. 
Kleinbaum, A.M., Stuart, T.E. & Tushman, M.L. 2013. Discretion within constraint: Homophily and 
structure in a formal organization. 
Organization Science
, 
24
(5): 1316-1336. 
Klotz, A. C., Hmieleski, K. M., Bradley, B. H., & Busenitz, L. W. 2014. New venture teams a review 
of the literature and roadmap for future research. 
Journal of Management
, 40(1): 226-255. 
Kornish, L. J., & Ulrich, K. T. 2014. The importance of the raw idea in innovation: Testing the sow's 
ear hypothesis. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 
51(1): 14-26. 
Kotha, R. & George, G. 2012. Friends, family, or fools: Entrepreneur experience and its implications 
for equity distribution and resource mobilization. 
Journal of Business Venturing
, 27(5): 525-
543. 
Kotha, R., George, G. & Srikanth, K. 2013. Bridging the mutual knowledge gap: Coordination and the 
commercialization of university science. 
Academy of Management Journal
, 56: 498–524. 
Lameez, A. & Van Knippenberg, D. 2014. Teams in pursuit of radical innovation: A goal orientation 
perspective." 
Academy of Management Review
, 39.4: 423-438. 
Lovas, B., & Ghoshal, S. 2000. Strategy as guided evolution. 
Strategic Management Journal
: 875-
896. 
Mao, A., Mason, W., Suri, S., & Watts, D. J. 2016. An experimental study of team size and 
performance on a complex task. 
PloS one
, 
11
(4), e0153048. 
McKenzie, D. 2017. Identifying and spurring high-growth entrepreneurship: experimental evidence 
from a business plan competition. 
American Economic Review
, 107(8), 2278-2307. 
Maxwell, A. L., Jeffrey, S. A. & Lévesque, M. 2001. Business angel early stage decision making. 
Journal of Business Venturing
, 26(2): 212-225. 
Monsen, E., Patzelt, H. & Saxton, T. 2010. Beyond Simple Utility: Incentive Design and Trade
-
Offs 
for Corporate Employee
-
Entrepreneurs. 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
, 34(1): 105-
130. 
Moskowitz, T. J., and A. Vissing-Jørgensen. 2002. The returns to entrepreneurial investment: A 
private equity premium puzzle? 
American Economic Review
92(4): 745–78. 
Perry-Smith, J. E. & Mannucci, P.V. 2017. From creativity to innovation: The social network drivers 
of the four phases of the idea journey. 
Academy of Management Review
, 42(1): 53-79. 
Puranam, P., Alexy, O. & Reitzig, M. 2014. What's “new” about new forms of organizing? 
Academy 
of Management Review
, 39(2), 162-180. 
Reagans, R. & Zuckerman, E.W. 2014. Networks, diversity, and productivity: The social capital of 
corporate R&D teams. 
Organization Science
, 12(4): 502-517. 
24 
Reagans, R., Zuckerman, E. & McEvily, B. 2004. How to make the team: Social networks vs. 
demography as criteria for designing effective teams. 
Administrative Science Quarterly
, 
49(1): 101-133. 
Reis, E. 2011. 
The Lean Startup
. New York: Crown Business. 
Reynolds, P. D. & White, S. B. 1997. The entrepreneurial process: Economic growth, men, women, 
and minorities. Praeger Pub Text. 
Ruef, M., Aldrich, H.E. & Carter, N. M. 2003. The structure of founding teams: Homophily, strong 
ties, and isolation among U.S. entrepreneurs. 
American Sociological Review
, 68(2): 195-222. 
Schjoedt, L., Monsen, E., Pearson, A., Barnett, T. & Chrisman, J.J. 2013. New venture and family 
business teams: Understanding team formation, composition, behaviors, and performance. 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
, 
37
(1): 1-15. 
Schwartz, B. (2004). 
The Paradox of Choice: Why More is Less
. New York: Ecco. 
Simon, H.A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics
, 59, 
99–118. 
Steffens, P., Terjesen, S. & Davidsson, P. 2012. Birds of a feather get lost together: new venture team 
composition and performance. 
Small Business Economics
, 39(3), 727-743. 
Thompson, L. L. 2000. 
Making the Team: A Guide for Managers
. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall. 
Zahra, S. A. 2015. Corporate entrepreneurship as knowledge creation and conversion: The role of 
entrepreneurial hubs. 
Small Business Economics
, 44.4: 727-735. 
25 
LIST OF TABLES AND FIGURES 
Table 1: Treatment overview
Team
Assign
Choose
Idea
Assign
Baseline 
“Choose neither”
Treatment 1 
“Choose team”
Choose
Treatment 2 
“Choose idea”
Treatment 3 
“Choose both” 
26 
Table 2: Evaluator expertise
Average per 
Evaluator 
# of startups founded 
0.88 
# of startups worked for 
1.20 
# of startups coached 
2.51 
# of startups funded with own money 
0.65 
# of startups funded as part of a venture capitalist decision 
0.42 
# of startups evaluated in the past 
25.56 
self-reported qualification for evaluating the pitch decks 
0.79 
27 
Table 3: Balance checks 
Average per Treatment 
Choose 
neither 
Choose 
team 
Choose 
idea 
Choose 
both 
Personal Characteristics 
Female 
0.309 
0.248 
0.239 
0.293 
Nationality 
0.843 
0.853 
0.872 
0.853 
Entrepreneurial efficacy 
40.593 
39.731 
39.829 
39.483 
Risk seeking 
54.034 
52.92 
50.38 
51.177 
Confidence 
64.047 
65.063 
66.026 
64.289 
Entrepreneurial career aspiration 
0.148 
0.105 
0.145 
0.121 
Entrepreneurial experience 
0.068 
0.038 
0.043 
0.034 
Number of entrepreneurs they know 
4.886 
4.668 
5.145
a
4.069 
Number of preferred team members 
2.407 
2.664 
2.543 
2.556 
Study Major 
General Engineering Science 
0.102 
0.113 
0.09 
0.086 
Constructional and Environmental Engineering 
0.148 
0.13 
0.132 
0.116 
Bio Process Engineering 
0.03 
0.042 
0.043 
0.017 
Computer Science 
0.119 
0.147 
0.145 
0.147 
Electrical Engineering 
0.042 
0.067
b
0.021 
0.052 
Energy and Environmental Engineering 
0.051 
0.063 
0.056 
0.06 
Computer Engineering 
0.076 
0.063 
0.094 
0.095 
Logistics and Mobility 
0.131 
0.109 
0.15 
0.142 
Mechanical Engineering 
0.157 
0.147 
0.137 
0.168 
Mechatronics 
0.025 
0.029 
0.013 
0.026 
Naval Architecture 
0.034 
0.034 
0.034 
0.03 
Process Engineering 
0.051 
0.038 
0.047 
0.034 
Note:
Every treatment was compared to every other treatment using t-tests. 
a 
and 
b
denote significance at the 
5% level for t-tests for the comparison between treatments 
Choose idea
vs. 
Choose both
and 
Choose team
vs. 
Choose idea
respectively 
28 
Figure 1: Model effects for novelty, market potential, success potential and investment
Note:
Includes fixed effects for cohort, tutor, evaluation order and evaluator. Standard errors reported are 
clustered at the team and evaluator level.
29 
Table 4: Regression results for novelty, market potential, success potential, and investment
Dependent variable:
Novelty 
Market Potential 
Success Potential 
Investment 
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Choose team 
(
𝛽
1
)
0.133 
0.342
**
5.135
*
11.508
*
(0.217) 
(0.174) 
(2.726) 
(6.307) 
Choose idea 
(
𝛽
2
)
0.773
***
0.653
***
10.060
***
26.903
***
(0.231) 
(0.181) 
(2.932) 
(9.774) 
Choose both 
(
𝛽
3
)
0.409
**
0.186 
2.257 
12.075
**
(0.182) 
(0.140) 
(1.570) 
(5.289) 
Constant 
0.220 
1.561
***
-13.074
***
-29.742
***
(0.337) 
(0.306) 
(4.967) 
(9.101) 
Cohort FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Tutor FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Evaluation Order FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Evaluator FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No. Observations 
926 
924 
893 
924 
Adjusted R
2
0.296 
0.399 
0.512 
0.146 
Note:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the team and evaluator 
level. 
30 
Table 5: Regression results for alternative specification 
Dependent variable:
Novelty 
Market Potential 
Success Potential 
Investment 
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Team choice treatments 
𝛿
!
0.133 
0.342
**
5.135
*
11.508
*
(0.217) 
(0.174) 
(2.726) 
(6.307) 
Idea choice treatments 
𝛿
!
0.773
***
0.653
***
10.060
***
26.903
***
(0.231) 
(0.181) 
(2.932) 
(9.774) 
Team choice treatments * 
Idea choice treatments 
𝛿
!
-0.497 
-0.809
***
-12.937
**
-26.335
**
(0.364) 
(0.309) 
(5.151) 
(13.198) 
Constant 
0.220 
1.561
***
-13.074
***
-29.742
***
(0.337) 
(0.306) 
(4.967) 
(9.101) 
Cohort FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Tutor FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Evaluation Order FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Evaluator FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No. Observations 
926 
924 
893 
924 
Adjusted R
2
0.296 
0.399 
0.512 
0.146 
31 
Table 6: Five possible channels how choice matters 
Variable 
Measurement 
Homophily 
Age diversity 
Sd. of team members’ age 
Gender diversity 
Blau Index of team members’ gender 
Variety of nationalities 
Number of distinct nationalities 
Variety of studies 
Number of distinct studies 
Semester diversity 
Sd. of team members’ semester 
Sorting 
Disparity in academic performance 
Sd. of team members’ exam grade 
Separation in prior confidence 
Sd. of team members’ prior confidence to perform well in 
class (survey item) 
Separation in prior entrepreneurial 
intention 
Sd. of team members’ prior intention to engage in 
entrepreneurship in the future (survey item) 
Separation in prior entrepreneurial 
Efficacy 
Sd. of team members’ prior entrepreneurial 
efficacy (average of survey items) 
Network 
Average acquaintance 
Mean of team members’ rating of how many team 
members they had known before (survey item) 
Fulfilled team member wishes 
Share of directed ties between team members that were 
asked for prior to the course (survey item) 
Teamwork 
Attendance 
Mean of team members’ class participation 
Disparity in attendance 
Sd. of team members’ class participation 
Team leave 
Dummy variable = 1 if team members have left the team 
throughout the course 
Collaboration among team members 
Mean of team members’ rating of whether project tasks 
were solved together vs. separately among team 
members (survey item) 
Overstated workload 
Sum of team members’ stated workload - 100% 
Disparity in stated workload 
Sd. of team members’ stated workload 
Satisfaction 
Identification with team 
Mean of team members’ identification with team (average 
of survey items) 
Identification with idea 
Mean of team members’ identification with idea (average 
of survey items) 
Judgement of project potential 
Mean of team members’ ratings of project’s success 
potential 0-100% (survey item) 
Intention to pursue project 
Mean of team members’ likelihood to pursue project 0-
100% (survey item) 
32 
Table 7: Homophily 
Dependent variable:
Age 
Diversity 
Gender 
Diversity 
Variety of 
Nationalities 
Variety of 
Studies 
Semester 
Diversity 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Choose team 
-0.020 
-0.085
**
-0.053 
-0.269
***
-0.447
***
(0.096) 
(0.037) 
(0.052) 
(0.026) 
(0.173) 
Choose idea 
-0.333
***
-0.013 
-0.059 
-0.063 
0.062 
(0.104) 
(0.032) 
(0.048) 
(0.040) 
(0.175) 
Choose both 
0.031 
-0.060
**
-0.015 
-0.178
***
-0.513
**
(0.114) 
(0.030) 
(0.035) 
(0.033) 
(0.202) 
Constant 
1.569
***
0.291
***
0.466
***
0.882
***
1.009
***
(0.101) 
(0.027) 
(0.033) 
(0.032) 
(0.165) 
Cohort FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Tutor FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Observations 
310 
310 
310 
310 
310 
Adjusted R
2
0.060 
0.125 
0.057 
0.226 
0.171 
Note
: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.
Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the tutor level. 
33 
Table 8: Sorting
Dependent variable:
Disparity in 
Academic 
Performance 
Separation 
in Prior 
Confidence 
Separation 
in Prior 
Entrepreneurial 
Intent 
Separation 
in Prior 
Entrepreneurial 
Efficacy 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Choose team 
-0.006 
-0.339
***
-4.242
**
-0.165 
(0.011) 
(0.103) 
(1.741) 
(0.101) 
Choose idea 
-0.021 
-0.206
**
-2.283 
-0.162 
(0.013) 
(0.097) 
(2.065) 
(0.105) 
Choose both 
-0.009 
0.012 
-3.508
**
-0.081 
(0.010) 
(0.079) 
(1.617) 
(0.083) 
Constant 
0.099
***
0.791
**
25.879
**
1.026
**
(0.009) 
(0.075) 
(1.562) 
(0.084) 
Cohort FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Tutor FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Observations 
269 
310 
310 
310 
Adjusted R
2
0.064 
0.075 
0.078 
0.046 
Note
: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.
Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the tutor level.
34 
Table 9: Network
Dependent variable:
Average 
Acquaintance 
Fulfilled Team 
Member Wishes 
(1) 
(2) 
Choose team 
0.758
***
0.152
***
(0.207) 
(0.038) 
Choose idea 
0.016 
-0.017 
(0.207) 
(0.044) 
Choose both 
0.606
***
0.130
***
(0.096) 
(0.025) 
Constant 
0.070 
0.027 
(0.122) 
(0.028) 
Cohort FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Tutor FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Observations 
309 
310 
Adjusted R
2
0.334 
0.260 
Note
: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.
Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the tutor level.
35 
Table 10: Teamwork
Dependent variable:
Attendance 
Disparity 
in 
Attendance 
Probability 
of 
Team Leave 
Team 
Collaboration 
Overstated 
Workload 
Disparity 
in Stated 
Workloads 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
Choose team 
-0.113 
-0.329 
-0.088 
0.530
**
-8.932
**
-1.907 
(0.390) 
(0.362) 
(0.060) 
(0.254) 
(3.676) 
(1.220) 
Choose idea 
-0.090 
0.098 
0.017 
0.213 
-1.495 
-1.202 
(0.363) 
(0.324) 
(0.053) 
(0.269) 
(4.036) 
(1.277) 
Choose both 
0.191 
-0.275
**
-0.090
**
0.376
***
-3.040 
-1.875 
(0.143) 
(0.129) 
(0.036) 
(0.163) 
(4.013) 
(1.275) 
Constant 
9.616
***
1.187
***
0.108
***
5.444
***
24.172
***
9.541
***
(0.230) 
(0.208) 
(0.040) 
(0.176) 
(3.762) 
(1.158) 
Cohort FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Tutor FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Observations 
310 
310 
310 
309 
310 
310 
Adjusted R
2
0.101 
0.080 
0.124 
0.135 
0.114 
0.080 
Note
: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.
Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the tutor level.
36 
Table 11: Satisfaction
Dependent variable:
Identification 
with Team 
Identification 
with Idea 
Judgement of 
Project Potential 
Intention to 
Pursue Project 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Choose team 
0.769
***
0.110 
-6.518 
-0.201 
(0.220) 
(0.178) 
(4.720) 
(1.877) 
Choose idea 
0.079 
0.859
***
-0.087 
-0.925 
(0.236) 
(0.183) 
(4.397) 
(2.401) 
Choose both 
0.445
***
1.195
***
13.637
***
7.921
***
(0.130) 
(0.150) 
(3.375) 
(2.876) 
Constant 
5.194
***
4.661
***
49.165
***
18.621
***
(0.152) 
(0.143) 
(3.389) 
(2.306) 
Cohort FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Tutor FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Observations 
309 
309 
309 
309 
Adjusted R
2
0.101 
0.320 
0.210 
0.175 
Note
: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.
Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the tutor level. 
37 
APPENDIX A: Team and idea randomization 
38 
APPENDIX B: Session Overview 
Session 
Title 
Event 
1 
Team building 
Intervention for endogenous or exogenous team composition 
2 
Idea specification 
Intervention for endogenous or exogenous topic 
3 
Customer 
Regular class 
4 
Vision 
Regular class 
5 
Prototyping 
Regular class 
6 
Market analysis 
Regular class 
7 
Marketing 
Regular class 
8 
Pricing 
Regular class 
9 
Finances 
Regular class 
10 
Feedback 
Peer and teacher feedback on pitch deck draft 
11 
Final presentation 
10min final pitch from each team; exit survey afterwards 
39 
APPENDIX C: Robustness checks for additional variables 
Note:
Includes fixed effects for cohort, tutor, evaluation order and evaluator. Standard errors reported are 
clustered at the team and evaluator level.
40 
APPENDIX D: Robustness checks for additional variables 
Feasibility 
Invitation Probability 
OLS
OLS
(1) 
(2) 
Choose team 
0.342 
6.079
**
(0.256) 
(3.013) 
Choose idea 
0.328 
10.785
***
(0.264) 
(3.896) 
Choose both 
-0.172 
4.622
*
(0.150) 
(2.662) 
Constant 
2.802
***
-15.576
***
(0.444) 
(5.668) 
Cohort FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Tutor FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Evaluation Order FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Evaluator FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Observations 
926 
919 
Adjusted R
2
0.296 
0.429 
Note:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the team and 
evaluator level.
41 
APPENDIX E: Robustness checks for all variables (non-linear regression) 
Dependent variable:
Novelty 
Ordered 
Probit
Market 
Potential 
Ordered 
Probit
Success 
Potential 
Tobit
Investment 
Tobit
Feasibility 
Ordered 
Probit
Invitation 
Probability 
Tobit
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
Choose team 
0.099 
0.281
**
5.807
*
57.489
*
0.261 
13.000
***
(0.160) 
(0.131) 
(3.254) 
(32.949) 
(0.194) 
(4.856) 
Choose idea 
0.575
***
0.540
***
11.828
***
108.721
***
0.255 
19.913
***
(0.168) 
(0.141) 
(3.729) 
(37.319) 
(0.199) 
(6.338) 
Choose both 
0.287
**
0.118 
2.229 
40.653
**
-0.131 
7.180
*
(0.133) 
(0.116) 
(1.797) 
(18.258) 
(0.114) 
(4.054) 
Log(scale) 
2.959
***
4.878
***
3.406
***
(0.072) 
(0.134) 
(0.062) 
Constant 
-12.026
*
-328.958
***
-36.268
***
(6.291) 
(72.259) 
(9.544) 
Ordered Thresholds 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
Cohort FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Tutor FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Evaluation Order FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Evaluator FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Note:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the team and 
evaluator level.
