HAL Id:
hal-01782262
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01782262
Submitted on 1 May 2018
HAL is
a
multi-disciplinary
open
access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of
sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions
in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL,
est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche,
publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers,
des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Comparing System-response Retrieval Models for
Open-domain and Casual Conversational Agent
Franck Charras, Guillaume Dubuisson Duplessis, Vincent Letard, Anne-Laure
Ligozat, Sophie Rosset
To cite this version:
Franck Charras, Guillaume Dubuisson Duplessis, Vincent Letard, Anne-Laure Ligozat, Sophie Rosset.
Comparing System-response Retrieval
Models for Open-domain and Casual
Conversational
Agent.
Second Workshop on Chatbots and Conversational Agent Technologies (WOCHAT@IVA2016), 2016,
Los Angeles, United States.
<hal-01782262>
Comparing System-response Retrieval Models for
Open-domain and Casual Conversational Agent
Franck Charras
1
, Guillaume Dubuisson Duplessis
1
, Vincent Letard
2
,
Anne-Laure Ligozat
3
, and Sophie Rosset
1
1
LIMSI, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91405 Orsay
2
LIMSI, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91405 Orsay
3
LIMSI, CNRS, ENSIIE, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91405 Orsay
{charras, gdubuisson, letard, annlor, rosset}@limsi.fr
Abstract.
This paper studies corpus-based process to select a system-
response usable both in chatterbot or as a fallback strategy. It presents,
evaluates and compares two selection methods that retrieve and adapt
a system-response from the OpenSubtitles2016 corpus given a human-
utterance.
A corpus of
800 annotated pairs is constituted.
Evaluation
consists in objective metrics and subjective annotation based on the va-
lidity schema proposed in the RE-WOCHAT shared task.
Our study
indicates that the task of
assessing the validity of
a system-response
given a human-utterance is subjective to an important extent,
and is
thus a difficult task. Comparisons show that the selection method based
on word embedding performs objectively better than the one based on
TF-IDF in terms of response variety and response length.
Keywords:
Example-based dialogue modelling; Open-domain dialogue
system;Human-Machine dialogue corpus; Evaluation
1
Introduction
This work aims at improving the design of dialogue strategies for conversational
agents (e.g., the famous Eliza [19]) that are involved in entertaining interactions
occurring in a social
environment,
e.g.,
a home,
a cafeteria,
a museum.
This
paper targets dyadic social open-domain conversations between a human and a
system.
We aim at designing a system that can be used either as a chatterbot
system, or as a fallback strategy for out-of-domain human utterances in a wider
dialogue system. In particular, we consider selection-based models as a promis-
ing approach to deal with some human utterances in social interaction (see, e.g.,
[9, 10][4][2],[16],[7]).
The main purpose of this kind of model
is to select an ap-
propriate response given a human utterance from a database of indexed dialogue
examples,
and adapt it by taking into account the history of dialogue.
To this
end, these data-driven models rely on large and varied corpora of Human-Human
interactions as well as on natural language processing tools to avoid the need of
a costly and time-consuming human intervention.
II
This paper focuses on the objective and subjective evaluations of two differ-
ent approaches of response selection that exploit the English part of the Open-
Subtitles2016 corpus [15].
More specifically,
we constitute a corpus of
human-
utterance/system-reponses pairs annotated with subjective evaluation follow-
ing the “validity”
annotation schema proposed in the (RE-)WOCHAT shared
task [6].
Next,
we offer a study of inter-annotator agreement of the subjective
evaluation of
selected system-response.
Then,
we analyse the main differences
between two different approaches for response selection (one based on TF-IDF
and the other on word embeddings).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
after the discussion of
related work (Section 2), we introduce the two response selection approaches our
work is based on (Section 3).
Next,
we describe our experimentation protocol
(Section 4), along with the corpus constitution and the annotation process. The
results are presented and discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes this
paper.
2
Related Work
Conversational systems are recently gaining a renewed attention in the research
community, 50 years after the famous ELIZA system [19]. This is shown by the
recent effort to generate and collect data from the (RE-)WOCHAT workshops [6]
involving various systems such as IRIS [4], Joker [7], Politician [12], pyEliza [5],
Sarah [1] and TickTock [20] systems. In particular, some approaches aim to select
an appropriate response from a corpus given a human utterance,
and adapt it
by taking into account the history of
dialogue.
A number of
selection-based
approaches aim at automatically authoring a conversational
strategy based on
large dialogue corpora such as movie scripts [4, 16],
movie subtitles [2, 7]
and
in-domain Human-Human dialogue corpus [9, 10].
Selection-based approaches rely on the exploitation of a large and varied cor-
pus of
Human-Human or Human-Machine interactions.
While there are more
and more available data for building data-driven dialogue systems (see, e.g., the
extensive study by Serban et al.
[18]),
there are few data available to author
social open-domain conversational system such as chatterbot. Recent efforts aim
to generate,
collect,
and evaluate chat-oriented dialogue data,
e.g.,
the UCAR
corpus [7]
4
and the (RE-)WOCHAT workshops [6]
5
.
A number of
current ap-
proaches exploit large corpora of transcribed/scripted interactions such as (but
not limited to) the Movie DiC Corpus [3]
or the recently released OpenSubti-
tles2016 corpus [15].
Several approaches have been undertaken to evaluate chatterbot and selection-
based systems. Some approaches focus on the level of engagement after each turn.
For instance,
a 5-Likert scale from “strongly disengaged”
to “strongly engaged”
is explored by the TickTock system [20]. Other approaches are interested in the
4
Corpus available at: https://ucar.limsi.fr/
5
Corpus available at: http://workshop.colips.org/re-wochat/data/
III
system utterance in terms of “appropriateness”, “breakdown”, “coherence” or “va-
lidity”.
Gandhe and Traum [10]
propose to evaluate selection-based systems in
terms of appropriateness via a static context evaluation. It consists in providing
the selection-based models with the same set of
contexts as input (i.e.,
a se-
quence of utterances forming the dialogue history) in order to select responses.
Then, human judges are asked to evaluate the selected responses given the input
context in terms of appropriateness (on a 5-Likert scale from “very inappropri-
ate”
to “very appropriate”). They report an inter-annotator agreement showing
that judging appropriateness is a difficult task for human judges.
Higashinaka
et al.
[11]
propose to evaluate chatterbot responses to human utterance on a
3-level scale of “breakdown” (not a breakdown/possible breakdown/breakdown).
A breakdown qualifies a system utterance after which it is difficult to continue
the conversation.
They report an inter-annotator agreement showing that it is
hard for human judges to agree on which system responses constitute a break-
down or not. Dubuisson Duplessis et al. [7] investigate the evaluation of system
utterance by their human interlocutor right after the interaction by consider-
ing three dimensions: understandability, coherence and relevance. In the context
of the (RE–)WOCHAT workshops,
an evaluation of system utterances on a 3-
level
scale of validity is proposed [6]
(invalid,
acceptable,
valid).
Report shows
encouraging results regarding inter-annotator agreement.
3
Selection-based Approaches
In this paper, we consider approaches based on a response selection mechanism.
Our approaches belong to the category of example-based dialogue modeling [14].
The main idea of this approach is to exploit a database of semantically indexed
dialogue examples to manage dialogue. A main feature of our work is the com-
plete automation of
the conversation strategy authoring process from the cre-
ation of the database of dialogue examples based on a corpus of dialogues to the
conversational management process. The main purpose of the dialogue manage-
ment process is to select an appropriate response from a database of
dialogue
examples given the human utterance. To this end, our approaches discern three
main steps:
(i) the selection of candidate system responses from the database of
examples, (ii) the selection of the most appropriate response, and (iii) the trans-
formation of the selected response by taking into account the human utterance.
In this paper, we consider one selection approach based on TF-IDF and an-
other approach based on word embedding.
These approaches are then used to
select a response in a subset of
the OpenSubtitles2016 corpus [15]
(described
in section 4).
Dialogue examples are initiative/response pairs from the corpus.
Given a human-utterance both approaches retrieve the most similar utterances
in the dialogue example database and select the most appropriate corresponding
response. These approaches differ in the way they select the candidate dialogue
examples and the subsequent response.
However,
they use the same transfor-
mation of the selected response.
It consists in a substitution of named entities
appearing in the human utterance in the selected response (a detailed account
IV
can be found in [7],
section 5.3 ).
For instance,
if the input utterance is “I love
Los Angeles .” (and “Los Angeles” has been detected as a location), it is substi-
tuted in the selected response “<location> is a nice place !” to produce the final
response “Los Angeles is a nice place !”.
It should be noted that this heuristic
allows incorrect replacement (e.g.,
an input such as “Hello Bob !”
can generate
a response such as “Hi Bob !” which is only appropriate if both interlocutors are
named “Bob”).
3.1
TF-IDF Approach
Our first approach exploits a TF-IDF similarity measure to retrieve candidate
initiative/response pairs.
It allows to retrieve pairs in which the initiative is
lexically close to the human-utterance. A detailed account of this approach can
be found in [7]. The similarity between the human-utterance and each initiative
utterance from the base is the mean of the tf-idf for each token (utterances are
considered as the documents, base is the set of all the documents):
σ(u
user
, u
base
) =
1
|(u
user
)|
X
w∈u
user
tf idf (w, u
base
, base)
(1)
Then,
a response is selected from the pool
of
candidate pairs.
We intend to
choose the most representative of
the responses.
To this end,
we compute the
mean word vector of all the possible responses and use it as the ideal mean of the
responses [7]. Responses from the pool of candidate pairs are then ranked by the
cosine similarity against the ideal
mean of responses in order to determine the
most appropriate response.
Finally,
the selected response is transformed using
the NE heuristic substitution previously described.
3.2
Word Embedding Approach
The second approach relies on word and utterance embeddings, using the doc2vec
model [13]. Word and utterance embeddings are jointly learnt as the coefficients
of a shallow neural network trained to predict a word, given its context and the
utterance it belongs to.
We focused especially in harvesting the utterance em-
beddings, as their cosine similarity can translate lexical and semantic similarity.
We used the implementation provided by Gensim [17],
with the length of the
context window set to 2.
After training the model,
we infer the embeddings of
the human utterances, and use it to retrieve the closest initiative in the example
database, with a nearest neighbour search. The selected answer is again adapted
with NE substitution.
4
Experimentation
This experimentation aims at evaluating objectively and subjectively a set of
open-domain human-utterance/system-response pairs in written English where
V
the response part is generated by one of the previously presented selection meth-
ods.
The first part of
the pair is drawn from human utterances available in
the RE-WOCHAT corpus of chatbot dialogues [6]. This experimention includes
three main steps:
(i) the selection of a subset of 400 human iniatives from the
RE-WOCHAT corpus,
(ii) the creation of a pair dataset by generating system
responses with the two selection methods, and (iii) the annotation of the system
response of each pair.
4.1
Selection of the Human Utterances
In this
experiment,
we only considered the human utterance from the RE-
WOCHAT corpus collected with English systems (namely,
IRIS [4],
Joker [7],
pyEliza [5], Sarah [1] and TickTock [20] systems).
We sampled the utterances with a probability that grow proportionally with
their number of
neighbours in the vector space described in 3.2.
We defined
neighbours as vectors within a sphere of radius 0.5.
As a result,
the groups of
similar utterances (for instance all
questions that began with “Do you like”)
were more likely to be sampled together while the isolated,
rarest utterances
were more likely to be excluded.
All
in all,
we selected a corpus of
400 human utterances.
Table 1 provides
some figures about this corpus. 97% of the automatically picked up human ut-
terances are unique
6
. A human-utterance contains approximately 6 tokens with
a minimum of 1 token and a maximum of 20 tokens.
4.2
Creation of the Pair Dataset
The English version of the OpenSubtitles2016 corpus [15]
was used as the cor-
pus to select response to human-utterance. This corpus is made from subtitles of
television dramas. It provides a large amount of transcribed interactions that can
be useful
for dialogue modelling.
It consists of
pre-processed subtitles format-
ted as sequences of tokenized sentences with timing information and meta-data
about the subtitle (e.g., identifiant of the TV episode). We completed this pre-
processing by applying a named entity (NE) recognition for each utterance. This
was done with the Stanford NER [8]. NEs are memorised for each utterance and
replaced by their type. Table 1 presents some figures about the selection corpus.
It shows that this corpus contains a wide variety of utterances. It is worth noting
that it includes nearly 14 millions unique utterances.
The creation of the dataset of human-utterance/system-response pairs con-
sists in generating a response for each one of the 400 human utterances and for
each selection method.
In all,
we generated a corpus of 800 pairs (2 × 400).
It
should be noted that pairs are not strictly speaking initiative/response pairs.
For instance,
the human-utterance may be a response to a previous utterance
such as “yeah”
or “all
right !”.
Table 1 presents some figures about the dataset
of generated responses.
A comparison between the TF-IDF-based method and
6
In this paper, utterance equality is the same as string equality.
VI
Selection corpus
Human
Response Selection
utterances
TF-IDF
Doc2Vec
Utterances
23,651,642
400
400
400
Unique utterances
13,913,129 (58.8%)
388 (97%)
265 (66.3%) 348 (87%)
Tokens
173,075,274
2429
2357
2961
Unique tokens
432,811
460
291
774
Tokens per utterance
. . . average/median
7.32/6
6.07/6
5.89/5
7.40/6
. . . std
5.34
3.10
3.06
5.04
. . . min/max
0/1140
1/20
0/20
1/28
Table 1. Figures about the selection corpus (subset of OpenSubtitles2016 [15]), about
the dataset of
human utterances and about the datasets of
generated responses.
In
bold, objective features discerning the two selection methods.
the Doc2Vec-based method shows that they vary on two main points.
First,
the Doc2Vec-based method generates responses that are more varied than the
TF-IDF-based method. Indeed, this is shown by the ratio of unique utterances
generated by the method (87% for the first one against 66.3% for the second
one). Besides, this can also be observed from the number of unique tokens used
by the two methods (774 for the first method against 291 for the second one).
This increase in variety can be explained by the fact that our TF-IDF-based
method tends to select the most average response (cf. section 3.1). Another ex-
planation may be found in the fact that the TF-IDF-based method is confined
to the lexical coherence while the Doc2Vec-based method tends to go toward “se-
mantic” coherence. Then, the Doc2Vec-based method generates longer responses
than the TF-IDF-based method. The responses selected by the Doc2Vec-based
method have the same median length than the initiaves in terms of tokens per
utterance. However, it should be noted that the length of these responses seem
to vary more importantly,
as shown by the largest standard deviation (5.04).
It should be noted that our TF-IDF-based method selects responses that are
globally smaller in number of tokens per utterance than the human utterances
from our corpus.
4.3
Annotation Process
The annotation process consists in the subjective evaluation of system responses
in each pair,
manually carried out by human annotators.
To this purpose,
we
adopted the annotation schema suggested in the RE-WOCHAT shared task [6].
Annotators were asked to select one (and only one) tag from the following list:
“valid”, “acceptable” and “invalid”. A response is “valid” if it is semantically and
pragmatically valid given the human-utterance.
For example,
valid responses
to the utterance “Do you have a girlfriend?”
include:
“No,
not yet.”,
“Yes,
of
course.”,
“You are too curious!”.
A response that is not semantically valid but
can be acceptable considering the human-utterance is “acceptable”. For example,
acceptable responses to the utterance “did you finish your homework already?”
VII
include:
“all
of it?”,
“why are you asking that?”,
“let us better talk about foot-
ball”.
A response that is definitely invalid considering the human-utterance is
annotated with “invalid”.
For example,
invalid responses to the utterance “are
you lazy?” include: “one, two.”, “I know they will.”, “your friends are out there.”.
4 participants were involved in the annotation effort. We constituted 2 groups
of 2 annotators. Annotators were explained the schema and were provided with
the official guidelines
7
. We constituted two complementary subsets of 400 out of
800 pairs from our dataset. Pairs are assigned randomly to one (and only one) of
the subset.
Subsets contain pairs generated by the two selection methods.
One
group of
annotators were assigned with the first subset,
while the other were
assigned with the second subset.
5
Results
5.1
Inter-Annotator Agreement
We first investigated the Inter-Annotator Agreement (IAA) on the annotation
task among the two pairs of
annotators.
Table 2 reports the Cohen’s Kappa
globally, per group and per selection method. We found, at most, a fair agreement
among the experiments.
The Cohen’s kappa calculated over all
annotations is
0.369.
The approach by embeddings yields a slightly higher agreement (κ =
0.382) than the tf-idf approach (κ = 0.355).
Next,
we took a closer look at the disagreement cases to better understand
why annotators disagree.
Table 3 presents the computation of IAA for several
subsets of our annotated corpus. It turns out that the annotators almost never
disagree by opposing valid and invalid labels (15% of the disagreement cases).
Indeed, 85% of the disagreements occurs with an acceptable label. Beside, when
considering only the pairs of annotations that do not contain the label
accept-
able,
we report a kappa equals to 0.732,
against merely 0.293 and 0.301 when
respectively excluding the annotations with the labels valid and invalid.
Table 4 presents some examples of pairs from our experiment in which system
responses have been assessed as “valid”.
These examples are related to human-
utterances that are yes/no question,
open question,
assertion or social
conven-
tions.
On the other hand,
Table 5 reports some examples of
pairs in which
system-response have been annotated as “invalid”.
Finally, we explored the impact of the length of the human-utterance on the
IAA. We found that the IAA is linked to the length of the human-utterance. In
particular, Figure 1 reveals that Cohen’s Kappa plummets for very short human-
utterances.
It shows that IAA ranges from 0.17 for short human utterances (1
or 2 tokens) to 0.48 for longer human utterances (≥ 10 tokens). IAA is at least
fair for human utterances exceeding 3 tokens.
7
Available at: http://workshop.colips.org/re-wochat/documents/Annotation_Guidelines.pdf
VIII
Group 1+2 Group 1 Group 2
All annotations
0.369
0.401
0.337
doc2vec approach
0.382
0.434
0.327
tf-idf approach
0.355
0.361
0.347
Table 2. Cohen’s Kappa calculated globally and over several
subsets of the annota-
tions. It reflects, at most, a fair inter-annotator agreement.
Samples remaining Group 1+2 Group 1 Group 2
Label acceptable removed
457
0.734
0.736
0.734
Label valid removed
572
0.293
0.343
0.246
Label invalid removed
266
0.301
0.347
0.265
Table 3.
Cohen’s Kappa calculated over several
subsets of
the annotations,
when
excluding pairs that were annotated with a certain label. It shows that, while the an-
notators agree on what are both ends of the spectrum, the intermediate class acceptable
is blurry.
H:
are you upset ?
S:
well , i ’m not .
H:
what is your middle name ?
S:
Ezekiel .
H:
i am happy at the moment .
S:
i ’m not happy at Addison .
H:
i have to go , bye
S:
bye .
Table 4. Pair examples in which system response has been rated as “valid”
by anno-
tators (“H” is the human, “S” is the system)
H:
do you like travelling ?
S:
Alfie , this is Tom .
H:
what is your middle name ?
S:
no .
H:
very interesting indeed
S:
hello .
H:
bye SYSTEM_NAME
S:
bye ,
SYSTEM_NAME ,
see you
when you ’ll be back .
Table 5. Pair examples in which system response has been rated as “invalid”
by an-
notators (“H” is the human, “S” is the system)
Fig. 1. Cohen’s kappa for annotations grouped by length of the human-utterance.
It
plummets for very short sentences.
IX
5.2
Comparison of the Selection Methods
In addition to exploring the annotation scheme in terms of “validity”, this study
also aims at comparing subjectively and objectively the two selection methods
(TF-IDF-based and Doc2Vec-based).
First, we investigated the distribution of “validity” annotations globally, per
selection method and in function of the agreement of the annotators. Figure 2 re-
ports the observed distributions. Globally, about half of the answers were rated
as “invalid”
across all
dialogues and approaches.
We observe a slightly higher
proportion of
answers rated as “valid”
when using the word embeddings.
Fur-
thermore,
when considering only the dialogues that the annotators agreed on,
we find a significantly higher proportion of “invalid” ratings: about two “invalid”
rating for one “valid” or “acceptable”.
Fig. 2. First line:
Distribution of all
annotations (left),
for doc2vec utterances (mid-
dle) and tf-idf utterances (right). Second line: Same distributions, on annotations that
annotators agreed on.
Then, we investigated objective features that make it possible to distinguish
the two methods. Table 1 summarises the objective features that we found and
discussed previously in section 4.2. The vocabulary found in the answers obtained
from embeddings contains more than twice more words than with the tf-idf
selection. Moreover, it produces answers almost half longer on average. We also
found that it uses more diverse answers, when the tf-idf tends to repeat the same
utterances for different human-utterances.
5.3
Discussion
We generated and annotated with the (RE-)WOCHAT annotation schema two
set of responses to open-domain human utterances via two selection-based sys-
X
tem (one based on TF-IDF similarity, one based on Doc2Vec). We have explored
the “validity”
part of
the evaluation annotation schema proposed for the RE-
WOCHAT shared task to evaluate the responses of
the system.
We reached a
fair agreement with Cohen’s Kappa globally ranging from 0.337 to 0.401 between
two groups of annotators. We took a closer look at the annotation by (i) study-
ing agreement in function of the labels (“invalid”,
“acceptable”,
“valid”),
and by
(ii) computing inter-annotator agreement in function of the size of the human
utterances. It turns out that the global Cohen’s Kappa did not exceed 0.5 con-
trary to what was found by [6]
(κ = 0.567).
However,
it should be noted that
the evaluation methodologies differ,
in particular on the fact that history was
limited to one human utterance in our case whereas annotators had access to the
entire dialogue history in [6].
Our study shows that it is very hard to reach an
agreement on system-response for very short human-utterance (< 3 tokens). Re-
sults also indicate that annotators cannot distinguish clearly “acceptable”
from
“valid” or “invalid”. However, they agree on what defines the two ends of the scale
(namely “invalid” and “valid”). This study thus confirms that it is hard for human
judges to assess the validity of a system response considering a human-utterance,
even with a schema limited to 3 tags.
Similar results have been observed with
evaluation schema taking other perspectives (namely,
“appropriateness”
[10]
or
“breakdown” [11]).
In addition,
we have compared two methods to select a response from a
large subset of
the OpenSubtitles2016 corpus given an open-domain human-
utterance.
We found two objective criteria that distinguish the two methods,
namely the response variety (ratio of unique utterance selected and size of the
vocabulary) and the response size in number of tokens.
Responses selected by
the Doc2Vec-based method are more varied and longer than responses selected
by the TF-IDF method,
two criteria that have been spotted as important to
foster human participation in chatterbot usage [7].
However,
we did not found
a clear difference on the subjective part.
Approximately half
of
the responses
selected by both methods are either valid or acceptable, whereas the other half
is invalid.
6
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we have presented two types of selection method that retrieve and
adapt a system-response selected from the huge English version of the OpenSub-
titles2016 corpus given an open-domain human-utterance . We have constituted a
manually annotated corpus of 800 human-utterance/system-response pairs to ob-
jectively and subjectively compare these two methods. We have investigated the
inter-annotator agreement of a 3-item validity schema used to evaluate system-
response proposed by the (RE-)WOCHAT shared task. Main results include the
fact that the doc2vec-based selection method performs objectively better than
the TF-IDF method in terms of response variety and response length. However,
we did not observe a clear difference between the two methods on the subjective
evaluation. Besides, our study indicates that the task of assessing the validity of
XI
a system-response considering a human-utterance is subjective to an important
extent, and is thus a difficult task.
Future work includes the improvements in the pre-processing phase of
our
approach of large resources of interactions such as OpenSubtitles2016 corpus to
enrich the sentences (e.g.,
with polarity) or to improve the dialogue structure
(e.g., structuring the corpus with turn and scenes). We also consider the study of
other corpora and other language as an interesting perspective. We are planning
to take into account dialogue history in the selection mechanism and studying
the impact of the size of this history on the objective and subjective quality of
the selected responses.
Acknowledgements
Authors warmly thank Jean-Baptiste Kerbœuf and Korantin Leveque for their
contribution on the annotation task. This work was partly funded by the JOKER
project and supported by ERA-Net CHIST-ERA,
and the “Agence Nationale
pour la Recherche” (ANR, France).
References
1.
Abu Shawar, B.: Sarah chatbot. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Collecting and
Generating Resources for Chatbots and Conversational
Agents-Development and
Evaluation Workshop Programme (RE-WOCHAT),
Shared Task Report,
LREC
(2016)
2.
Ameixa,
D.,
Coheur,
L.,
Fialho,
P.,
Quaresma,
P.:
Luke,
I am your father:
deal-
ing with out-of-domain requests by using movies subtitles.
In:
Intelligent Virtual
Agents. pp. 13–21. Springer (2014)
3.
Banchs,
R.E.:
Movie-dic:
a movie dialogue corpus for research and development.
In: Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics:
Short Papers-Volume 2.
pp.
203–207.
Association for Computational
Linguistics (2012)
4.
Banchs,
R.E.,
Li,
H.:
IRIS:
a chat-oriented dialogue system based on the vector
space model. In: Proceedings of the ACL 2012 System Demonstrations. pp. 37–42.
Association for Computational Linguistics (2012)
5.
D’Haro, L.: Py-eliza: A python-based implementation of the famous computer ther-
apist.
In:
Proceedings of
the Workshop on Collecting and Generating Resources
for Chatbots and Conversational
Agents-Development and Evaluation Workshop
Programme (RE-WOCHAT), LREC (2016)
6.
D’Haro, L., Abu Shawar, B., Yu, Z.: Shared task on data collection and annotation,
re-wochat 2016–shared task description report.
In:
Proceedings of the Workshop
on Collecting and Generating Resources for Chatbots and Conversational Agents-
Development
and Evaluation Workshop Programme
(RE-WOCHAT),
LREC
(2016)
7.
Dubuisson Duplessis,
G.,
Letard,
V.,
Ligozat,
A.L.,
Rosset,
S.:
Purely corpus-
based automatic conversation authoring. In: Chair), N.C.C., Choukri, K., Declerck,
T.,
Goggi,
S.,
Grobelnik,
M.,
Maegaard,
B.,
Mariani,
J.,
Mazo,
H.,
Moreno,
A.,
Odijk, J., Piperidis, S. (eds.) Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
XII
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016). European Language Resources
Association (ELRA), Paris, France (may 2016)
8.
Finkel, J.R., Grenager, T., Manning, C.: Incorporating non-local information into
information extraction systems by Gibbs sampling.
In:
Proceedings of
the 43rd
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics. pp. 363–370. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (2005)
9.
Gandhe, S., Traum, D.R.: Creating spoken dialogue characters from corpora with-
out annotations. In: INTERSPEECH. pp. 2201–2204 (2007)
10.
Gandhe, S., Traum, D.R.: Surface text based dialogue models for virtual humans.
In: Proceedings of the SIGDIAL (2013)
11.
Higashinaka,
R.,
Funakoshi,
K.,
Araki,
M.,
Tsukahara,
H.,
Kobayashi,
Y.,
Mizukami, M.: Towards taxonomy of errors in chat-oriented dialogue systems. In:
16th Annual
Meeting of
the Special
Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue.
p. 87 (2015)
12.
Kuboň, D., Hladká, B.: Politician. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Collecting
and Generating Resources for Chatbots and Conversational
Agents-Development
and Evaluation Workshop Programme
(RE-WOCHAT),
Shared Task Report,
LREC (2016)
13.
Le, Q.V., Mikolov, T.: Distributed representations of sentences and documents. In:
ICML. vol. 14, pp. 1188–1196 (2014)
14.
Lee, C., Jung, S., Kim, S., Lee, G.G.: Example-based dialog modeling for practical
multi-domain dialog system. Speech Communication 51(5), 466–484 (2009)
15.
Lison,
P.,
Tiedemann,
J.:
OpenSubtitles2016:
Extracting Large Parallel
Corpora
from Movie and TV Subtitles.
In:
10th edition of
the Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference (LREC). Portorož, Slovenia (May 2016)
16.
Nio, L., Sakti, S., Neubig, G., Toda, T., Adriani, M., Nakamura, S.: Developing non-
goal dialog system based on examples of drama television. In: Natural Interaction
with Robots, Knowbots and Smartphones, pp. 355–361. Springer (2014)
17.
Řehůřek, R., Sojka, P.: Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Cor-
pora.
In:
Proceedings of
the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP
Frameworks. pp. 45–50. ELRA, Valletta, Malta (May 2010)
18.
Serban,
I.V.,
Lowe,
R.,
Charlin,
L.,
Pineau,
J.:
A survey of available corpora for
building data-driven dialogue systems. CoRR abs/1512.05742 (2015)
19.
Weizenbaum,
J.:
ELIZA - a computer program for the study of natural
language
communication between man and machine.
Communications of
the ACM 9(1),
36–45 (Jan 1966)
20.
Yu,
Z.,
Papangelis,
A.,
Rudnicky,
A.:
Ticktock:
A non-goal-oriented multimodal
dialog system with engagement awareness. In: 2015 AAAI Spring Symposium Series
(2015)
