Forward Flow 1 
Running Head: Forward Flow 
accepted
, American Psychologist 
“Forward Flow”: A New Measure to Quantify Free Thought and Predict Creativity 
Authors
: Kurt Gray
1*
, Stephen Anderson
1
, Eric Evan Chen
2
, John Michael Kelly
2
, Michael 
Christian
3
, John Patrick
4
, Laura Huang
5
, Yoed N. Kenett
6
, Kevin Lewis
7 
Affiliations
: 
1
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience 
2 
University of California—Irvine, Department of Psychology and Social Behavior 
3
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Kenan-Flagler School of Business, Department of 
Organizational Behavior 
4
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Department of Dramatic Art 
5
Harvard Business School, Organizational Behavior Unit 
6
University of Pennsylvania, Department of Psychology 
7
University of California—San Diego, Department of Sociology 
Keywords: Free thought; Default network; Methodology; Creativity; Mind wandering 
*Correspondence to: 
Kurt Gray 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience 
kurtjgray@gmail.com 
Forward Flow 2 
Abstract 
When the human mind is free to roam, its subjective experience is characterized by a 
continuously evolving stream of thought. Although there is a technique that captures people’s 
streams of free thought—free association—its utility for scientific research is undermined by two 
open questions: 1) How can streams of thought be quantified? and 2) Do such streams predict 
psychological phenomena? We resolve the first issue—quantification—by presenting a new 
metric, “forward flow,” that uses latent semantic analysis (LSA) to capture the semantic 
evolution of thoughts over time (i.e., how much present thoughts diverge from past thoughts). 
We resolve the second issue—prediction—by examining whether forward flow predicts 
creativity in the lab and the real-world. Our studies reveal that forward flow predicts creativity in 
college students (Study 1) and a representative sample of Americans (Study 2), even when 
controlling for intelligence. Studies also reveal that membership in real-world creative groups—
performance majors (Study 3), professional actors (Study 4) and entrepreneurs (Study 5)—is 
predicted by forward flow, even when controlling for performance on divergent thinking tasks. 
Study 6 reveals that forward flow in celebrities’ social media posts (i.e., on Twitter) predicts 
their creative achievement. In addition to creativity, forward flow may also help predict mental 
illness, emotional experience, leadership ability, adaptability, neural dynamics, group 
productivity, and cultural success. We present open-access online tools at www.forwardflow.org 
for assessing and visualizing forward flow for both illustrative and large-scale data analytic 
purposes. 
Keywords: Free thought; Default network; Methodology; Creativity; Measurement; Mind 
Wandering 
Forward Flow 3 
“Forward Flow”: A New Measure to Quantify Free Thought and Predict Creativity 
Williams James (1890) argued that the human self is defined by “thoughts connected as 
we feel them to be connected” (p. 141). This mental flow is characterized by both continuity and 
change, in what he called a “stream of thoughts, of consciousness” (p. 141). Although the term 
“stream of consciousness” is now in everyday use, psychological research is very different today 
than in the 19th century. In contrast to James—who wrote introspective, holistic, and qualitative 
accounts of the mind—psychology journals today typically publish quantitative experiments that 
investigate specific mental processes underlying circumscribed phenomena. This increased focus 
on measurement and mechanism is natural, and even desirable, as a science matures. However, 
increased precision and specificity may sometimes neglect some important elements of 
subjective experience (Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991)—such as the dynamics of free 
thought. 
Like James’s proverbial stream, our “free” thoughts—i.e., thoughts unbound to specific 
stimuli—flow forward through time, constantly evolving. However, few studies examine this 
dynamic unfolding, instead assessing thoughts at a single time point toward a single referent 
(e.g., via Likert scales). Although much can be learned from these static assessments, there is an 
approach that captures freely flowing thoughts: free association. Free association is a simple 
psychological technique in which people report the thoughts that spontaneously arise in 
connection with previous thoughts. In one popular version of free association—“targeted” free 
association—people hold a seed concept (e.g., mother) or image (e.g., an inkblot) in mind and 
report all the thoughts that stem from this target thought. This version of free association was 
widely used in psychoanalysis to reveal unconscious associations
1
with important psychoanalytic 
elements (Farber, 2005; Freud, 2013), and is still sometimes used today to exhaustively map out 
conceptual associations (Stark, Kogler, Gaisbauer, Sedmak, & Kirchler, 2016). 
Another version of free association—“chain” free association—better represents James’s 
idea of a “stream of thought.” Participants are given a seed concept (thought 1) and report their 
first association (i.e., thought 2); then their first association from thought 2 (i.e., thought 3); then 
their first association from thought 3 (i.e., thought 4); and so on. In other words, each thought 
x
n
is the direct association from thought 
x
n-1
. Chain free association—hereafter simply called “free 
association”—gives researchers a rich picture of dynamic subjective experience, revealing how a 
person’s thoughts evolve over time (Marron & Faust, 2018). 
Despite its great potential within psychological research (De Deyne et al., 2016; Joffe & 
Elsey, 2014; Nelson, McEvoy, & Dennis, 2000), free association—and the stream of thoughts it 
reveals—is often overlooked in modern studies, likely because of two issues. The first issue is 
methodological: It is unclear 
how
to use free association in modern quantitative studies. The 
second issue is conceptual: It is unclear 
why
free association is scientifically useful (in other 
words, what exactly do streams of thought predict?). We first review a potential solution to the 
1
Although these associations are not “unconscious” in the strict sense (Epstein, 1994), they may nevertheless 
provide insight into otherwise hidden dimensions of patients’ mental lives (Westen, 1999). 
Forward Flow 4 
methodological issue—latent semantic analysis—before suggesting one area where free 
association might offer predictive power—creativity. 
From Qualitative Experience to a Quantitative Metric 
Free association yields a rich picture of subjective experience, illustrating thoughts as 
they meander through a multi-dimensional semantic space. But this richness can also be a curse. 
Modern psychological studies often seek to represent people’s characteristics and behaviors with 
small sets of discrete numbers, such as an IQ score for intelligence or Big Five scores for 
personality. We can debate whether such reduction is desirable, but it is a fact of much 
contemporary science. The practical question for us is whether the stream of thoughts captured 
by free association can also be distilled to a small set of values, or perhaps even a single number. 
The technique of latent semantic analysis provides a potential solution to this problem. 
Latent semantic analysis (LSA; Deerwester, Dumais, Furnas, Landauer, & Harshman, 1990) 
computes the semantic similarity—or inversely, the distance—between two words based on the 
frequency of their co-occurrence within some corpora of text. For example, “snow” and “white” 
often appear together in books, magazines, and newspapers, and so have a small semantic 
distance. Conversely, “snow” and “carburetor” seldom co-occur and so have a large semantic 
distance. LSA can be applied to any list of words and returns the set of semantic distances 
between all pairs of words ranging from 0 (minimally different) to 1 (maximally different). For 
example, analyzing a list of 5 words (e.g., bear, honey, sugar, frosting, cake) with LSA would 
return a symmetric 5 x 5 matrix (with zeroes along the diagonal because a word has zero 
semantic distance from itself). The cell 
x
ij
gives the semantic distance between the 
i
th word and 
the 
j
th word. In our example, 
x
1,5 
would give the semantic distance between the first word (bear) 
and the fifth word (cake), which is .66 (calculated at lsa.colorado.edu). 
While objections have been raised against LSA (e.g., dependency on the specific text 
corpora and the specific number of dimensions used to calculate semantic space) it is still widely 
applied to study memory and language (Kenett, Levi, Anaki, & Faust, 2017). Here, LSA can be 
used to analyze free association because free association yields a sequential list of words, one for 
each thought in a stream of consciousness. Of course, a matrix of semantic distances is not 
simple to use, especially as lengthier lists of 
N
words produce proportionately large 
N
x 
N
matrices. We outline a new composite measure that reduces this complexity (regardless of list 
length/matrix size) and may also predict diverse psychological phenomena. We call this metric 
forward flow
because it captures the extent to which people’s streams of thought “flow forward” 
in semantic space. 
The Forward Flow of Thought 
In simple terms, forward flow quantifies how much current thoughts semantically depart 
from previous thoughts within free association. In the metaphor of a stream of thought, forward 
flow is how far “downstream” later thoughts are compared to earlier “upstream” thoughts. For 
example, the free association sequence “candy, sugar, delicious, yummy, treat” would have low 
Forward Flow 5 
forward flow because later thoughts are semantically similar to previous thoughts. That is, rather 
than flowing away from earlier thoughts (e.g., “candy”), the later thoughts in this sequence (e.g., 
“yummy” and “treat”) remain relatively close to them. Conversely, the free association sequence 
“candy, store, warehouse, forklift, safety” would have higher forward flow because later 
thoughts are semantically dissimilar to previous thoughts (“forklift” and “safety” may be 
semantically near, but they are both quite distant from “candy”). Importantly, then, forward flow 
is not just about the association between any two adjacent thoughts, but rather a holistic measure 
that captures the dynamics of an 
overall
sequence of thought, regardless of length. 
The instantaneous forward flow of any particular thought is calculated by its average 
semantic distance from all preceding thoughts, as given by Equation 1 (where D is semantic 
distance between thoughts and 
n 
is the numerical location of a thought within a stream). 
Equation 1:
∑
𝐷
𝑛,𝑖
𝑛−1
𝑖=1
𝑛−1
The dynamic forward flow of an entire thought sequence—what we call “forward flow”—is 
calculated by the average of Equation 1 across all thoughts in a sequence, as given by Equation 2 
(where again D is semantic distance between thoughts, and 
n 
is the total number of thoughts 
within a stream). 
Equation 2: 
�
∑
∑
𝐷
𝑖,𝑗
𝑖−1
𝑗=1
𝑖−1
𝑛
𝑖=2
�
(
𝑛 − 1
)
�
This “forward flow” is not the “flow” of Csikszentmihályi (1990)—being present in the 
moment—but instead captures the degree of change within a stream of thought, similar to the 
idea of “mental progression” (Mason & Bar, 2012). In the words of James (1880, p. 456), 
forward flow distinguishes between those who have “thoughts of concrete things patiently 
following one another in a beaten track of habitual suggestion” (low forward flow) from those 
who have “abrupt cross-cuts and transitions from one idea to another...[who make] the most 
unheard-of combinations of elements.” (high forward flow). Of course, no single number can 
fully capture the dynamic richness of subjective experience, but forward flow allows researchers 
to quantify streams of thought as they unfold via free association. Forward flow is also 
straightforward to measure, requiring only a minute or two at the beginning of a study for people 
to free associate a list of thoughts. 
In order to make forward flow accessible to researchers, we have developed an open-
access online suite of resources (www.forwardflow.org) that provides LSA distances and 
forward flow metrics for both individual lists and arbitrarily large datasets of word sequences 
(see supplementary materials for development materials).
2
These resources also provide a way to 
graphically depict thought sequences—the “thought plot.” In a thought plot, each thought is 
sequentially listed in equal intervals along the x-axis, with its instantaneous forward flow 
2
Our LSA engine is trained on similar corpora as the Colorado engine and yields similar similarity metrics. 
However, the Colorado engine does not allow for high-throughput or integration with other applications, and so we 
needed to develop our own engine. 
Forward Flow 6 
depicted on the y-axis. These graphs illustrate an individual’s stream of thought, as can be seen 
in Figure 1, which compares two thought plots drawn from Study 1. 
So far, we have suggested that forward flow is an easy-to-use metric that quantifies 
streams of free thought. However, a second question is this tool’s utility: What phenomena, if 
any, are predicted by the kind of free-varying thought captured by forward flow? 
Is Free Thought Useful? 
Free association is a rich technique because it generates relatively unconstrained 
thoughts. These “free” thoughts stand in contrast to those measured during modern psychology 
experiments, which are almost always bound to a specific referent (i.e., they are “task-bound”). 
When we assess someone’s personality, hopes about the future, or thoughts about another 
person, we are directing their attention to that focal object, and there are certainly benefits to this 
focus: Task-bound thoughts about a phenomenon are—by definition—more relevant to that 
phenomenon than are thoughts in general. However, assessing only task-bound thoughts can give 
a biased picture of mental life, neglecting important psychological phenomena tied to free 
thought (e.g., mind wandering Smallwood, McSpadden, & Schooler, 2007, Zedelius & Schooler, 
2015). 
Recent neuroscience research reveals that many phenomena may be tied to the dynamics 
of unconstrained thoughts (Christoff, Irving, Fox, Spreng, & Andrews-Hanna, 2016). For many 
years, neuroscience studies focused exclusively on task-bound thoughts by measuring brain 
activity during experimental tasks, which typically involve reading or viewing images (for a 
review, see Gruberger et al., 2011). These tasks are typically clustered into blocks with 
“inactive” time between them, during which participants simply lay staring into the dark. 
However, participants’ brains remained quite active during this inactivity, in what researchers 
have since termed “default network” activity (Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008). 
Default network activity corresponds to daydreaming (Kucyi & Davis, 2014), mind 
wandering (Mason et al., 2007), and other phenomena associated with less-constrained thought 
(e.g., Mazoyer et al., 2001). Studies reveal that this activity is linked to performance in a variety 
of important domains, including autobiographical memory (Spreng & Grady, 2010), theory of 
mind (Spreng, Mar, & Kim, 2009), episodic thought (Andrews-Hanna, Reidler, Huang, & 
Buckner, 2010), event construal (Tamir & Mitchell, 2011), and understanding both fiction and 
other minds (Tamir, Brickler, Dodell-Feder, & Mitchell, 2016). Most importantly for this paper, 
default network activity also predicts creativity (Beaty et al., 2018; Kühn et al., 2014), likely 
because relatively unconstrained thinking is important for the generation and retention of novel 
ideas (Jung, Mead, Carrasco, & Flores, 2013). 
Although important, these neuroscience studies connecting creativity to unconstrained 
thought have limitations. Measuring default network activity requires access to an expensive 
fMRI scanner, and the exact content of these default network activity-related thoughts is unclear. 
It is also unclear what specific aspects of unconstrained thought predict creativity. We suggest 
Forward Flow 7 
that free association provides a cheap and easy way to reveal the contents of unconstrained 
thought, and that its quantification via forward flow that may predict creativity. 
Forward Flow and Creativity 
Both anecdotal and scientific evidence suggest a potential link between forward flow and 
creativity—in particular, divergent thinking.
3
Anecdotally, creative people are often good at 
generating works that leave behind the past: Jackson Pollock moved beyond easels and brushes 
and Einstein moved beyond Newtonian mechanics. This “forward movement” appears in many 
artistic and scientific creative works as visionaries eschew tradition for originality. Indeed, Walt 
Disney’s recipe for creativity makes this connection explicit: “Around here… we don't look 
backwards for very long. We keep moving forward, opening up new doors and doing new 
things.” As thinking is for doing (Fiske, 1992), those who complete more “forward-moving” 
creative actions might also have more “forward-moving” thoughts. 
Recent studies support the idea that creativity is related to individual differences in 
memory organization (Hass, 2017; Heinen & Johnson, 2017)—differences that allow more 
creative participants to connect ideas that are further apart in memory (Kenett, Anaki, & Faust, 
2014). Most relevant to the current work, associative dynamics appear related to both creative 
performance and default network activity (Marron et al., 2018). However, one limitation of these 
studies is that they all assess task-bound thoughts, measuring cognitive processes while 
participants are engaged in creative tasks or are explicitly instructed to be creative. Although 
many real-world situations entail conscious efforts to be creative, here we examine whether 
features of unconstrained thought—free association 
without
instructions to be creative—might 
also predict creativity across diverse settings and populations. Can forward flow predict 
divergent thinking and perhaps even the choices and outcomes related to people’s careers? 
Importantly, we do not claim that forward flow is the “best” predictor or measure of 
creativity. Creativity is predicted by expertise (Baer & Kaufman, 2005), personality (Kaufman et 
al., 2016), attentional control (Beaty, Benedek, Silvia, & Schacter, 2016), one’s social network 
(Perry-Smith & Shalley, 2003), and the broader cultural milieu (Rudowicz, 2003). There are also 
many measures of creativity which predict creative performance. Nevertheless, revealing the 
predictive power of forward flow in creativity would both contribute to this important body of 
work and point to the general methodological utility of assessing streams of free thought. 
Research Plan 
Six studies (plus one pilot study) examine whether forward flow predicts creativity. In the 
first two studies, we compute forward flow from free association sequences and test whether it 
predicts performance on divergent thinking tasks within a college sample (Study 1) and a 
representative sample of Americans (Study 2). In the next three studies, we use a known groups 
3
Divergent thinking tasks are widely applied creativity measurements, requiring participants to generate novel 
responses to open ended questions (Runco & Acar, 2012). Convergent thinking, an alternative measure of creativity, 
requires participants to respond to closed ended questions (Simonton, 2015). 
Forward Flow 8 
paradigm to examine whether membership in real-world creative groups—performance majors 
(Study 3), professional actors (Study 4) and entrepreneurs (Study 5)—can be predicted by 
forward flow, even when controlling for performance on divergent thinking tasks. Finally, we 
treat social media posts as streams of consciousness unfolding over time and test whether 
forward flow on Twitter predicts creative achievement (Study 6). All data and analysis syntax is 
available at osf.io/a4hc9. 
Measures and Methods 
Methods Used Across Most Studies 
The studies presented here build sequentially on each other, providing systematic 
replication and extension. As such, they share many methods in common; we summarize them 
here to avoid redundancy. 
Assessing Forward Flow 
Thought Collection
. In Studies 1-5, forward flow was assessed to capture relatively 
unconstrained thought. It was always assessed first to avoid contamination from other measures. 
Participants received a seed word followed by 19 blank lines, with these instructions: “On this 
page, starting with the word ‘[seed word]’, your job is to write down the next word that follows 
in your mind from the previous word. Please put down only single words, and do not use proper 
nouns (such as names, brands, etc.).” Seed words—which varied both within and across studies 
to enhance generalizability—ensured all participants had the same “starting place” in thought, 
allowing for controlled comparisons between streams of thought. See supplementary materials 
for all seed words. Importantly, participants were 
not
instructed to be creative. 
Forward Flow calculation
. To calculate forward flow, we used our custom LSA engine, 
whose development—including training corpora and calculation techniques—is documented at 
forwardflow.org and in the supplementary materials. The LSA engine used a 300 dimensional 
space (as in Deerwester, Dumais, Furnas, Landauer, & Harshman, 1990) to generate a symmetric 
20 x 20 matrix for each participant, representing the semantic distance (i.e., the inverse of 
semantic similarity) between each pair of words. Forward flow was calculated via Equation 2. 
Assessing Creativity via Divergent Thinking
In Studies 1-5, participants completed a set of divergent thinking tasks. Responses in 
each task were coded for creativity by multiple raters (details below). Regardless of the task, 
participants were always instructed to be as creative as possible. (For complete materials, see 
supplementary materials). For generalizability, we sampled from a diverse set of tasks: 
Novel Uses Task
. Participants generate three novel uses for a common item (Guilford, 
1950)—a box of popsicle sticks. A less creative response might be “making popsicles” and a 
more creative response might be “building a raft for beetles.” 
Draw an Alien Task
. Participants are given a blank page and some crayons and are 
asked to draw an extraterrestrial (Ward, 1994). A less creative alien might look like a human 
Forward Flow 9 
with an oblong head and a more creative alien might look nothing like a human at all. 
Charity Idea Task
. Participants come up with three ways for a hypothetical charity to 
raise money from the community (Lucas & Nordgren, 2015). A less creative idea might be to 
call people on the phone and a more creative idea might be to sell tickets to puppy races. 
Caption Task
. Participants write a caption for each of three abstract images, such as 
intersecting lines or an array of circles (Torrance, 1972). A less creative response to an array of 
circles might be “spots” and a more creative response might be “a galaxy of stars.” 
Similarity Task
. Participants see word pairs (e.g., train/tractor) and come up with a way 
in which the pair is related (Wallach & Kogan, 1965). A less creative response to this example 
might be “vehicles” and a more creative response might be “links in the food production chain.” 
Coding Creativity 
All responses on divergent thinking tasks were rated by at least two coders, who assigned 
a number from 1 (least creative) to 4 (most creative) to each response by considering both the 
novelty and relevance of responses. (For example, saying that a set of popsicle sticks could be 
used as “a piranha fight” would be novel but not relevant.) In all studies, coders first discussed a 
random sample of 10 responses for calibration before independently rating all responses. 
Responses within each task were averaged together to form a total task score. Reliability across 
coders for all tasks was above α = .81 across all studies, and typically much higher (see 
supplementary materials). In all studies, creativity ratings between tasks were significantly 
correlated and so were collapsed into an overall creativity index for each participant. 
Exclusions
Participants were excluded from analyses if they generated two or more unprocessable 
words during free association (e.g., “Nike,” “Matthew,” or “Schnizzle”), if their forward flow 
was more than 3 standard deviations from the mean (often because they wrote the same words 
over and over), or if they left large portions of the survey unfinished (e.g., all the cognitive 
capacity measures). The number of exclusions for each study is detailed within that study. 
Methods Used Across Some Studies 
Assessing Cognitive Capacity 
As creativity is often linked to general cognitive capacity (i.e., intelligence; Silvia, 2015), 
cognitive capacity was assessed in the first three studies as a control variable using some 
combination of three tasks. All tasks are detailed in full in the supplementary materials. 
GRE Verbal
. As forward flow is a verbal task, it is especially important to control for 
general verbal ability. We used problems from the GRE verbal to assess this ability. 
Cognitive Reflection Task (CRT)
. In this three-item task, wrong answers spring quickly 
to mind whereas correct answers require more reflection (Frederick, 2005). 
Raven’s Matrices
. This standard intelligence task asks people to complete a series of 
Forward Flow 10 
incomplete visually patterned matrices (Raven, 2000). 
In all studies in which cognitive capacity was assessed, measures were significantly 
correlated and so were collapsed into a single cognitive capacity index for each participant. 
Assessing Convergent Thinking 
In Study 1, we assessed convergent thinking via the Remote Associates Task (RAT; 
Mednick, 1962; Simonton, 2015). In the RAT, respondents are given a set of triplets (e.g., 
cottage/swiss/cake) and asked to find a word that unites them (e.g., cheese). These triplets have 
only one solution and participants are not instructed to be creative. Convergent thinking was not 
assessed beyond the first study because it showed no significant correlations with other 
measures. 
Creativity Achievement Questionnaire 
In Study 6, we used a modified Creative Achievement Questionnaire (CAQ; Carson, 
Peterson, & Higgins, 2005) to measures real-world creative accomplishments in 10 domains: 
visual arts, music, dance, architectural design, creative writing, humor, inventions, scientific 
discovery, theater/film, and culinary arts. In our version of the CAQ, coders simply noted the 
presence or absence of clear success in a given domain. 
Pilot Study: An Initial Test of the Link between Forward Flow and Creativity 
We first conducted a small pilot study that measured forward flow (as assessed by LSA 
analyses of a free association sequence) and creativity (as assessed by three divergent thinking 
tasks: novel uses, draw an alien, and charity ideas) among 35 amateur actors (54.3% female, 
M
age
= 41.03, 
SD
age
=
17.24, 3 exclusions) attending a workshop. As predicted, forward flow predicted 
creativity ratings on divergent thinking tasks, 
r
(30) = .46, 
p 
= .008, providing initial evidence for 
an association between the forward motion of free thought and creativity. 
Studies 1 and 2: Correlation Between Forward Flow and Creativity 
These studies assessed whether forward flow predicted creativity in divergent thinking 
tasks for college students (Study 1) and a representative sample of Americans (Study 2). 
Study 1: College Students 
Undergraduate University of North Carolina (UNC) students (N = 277, 55% female, 
M
age
= 19.76, 
SD
age 
= 2.65, 60 exclusions) were recruited from high-traffic areas of campus until we 
achieved a sample size of at least 194, which would give us 80% power to detect an effect size of 
r 
= .2. Participants completed the forward flow measure and the “novel uses” and “draw an 
alien” tasks to measure creativity. Convergent thinking was assessed with the RAT and cognitive 
capacity was assessed with GRE Verbal questions and the CRT. 
Results
.
As predicted, forward flow was positively associated with creativity, 
r
(215) = 
.24, 
p
< .001, even when controlling for cognitive ability, 
β 
= .24, 
p
< .001. Figure 1 contrasts the 
thought plots of participants with high and low creativity ratings. Forward flow did not 
Forward Flow 11 
significantly correlate with convergent thinking, 
r
(215) = - .00, 
p
= .96, demonstrating some 
divergent validity (i.e., forward flow does not correlate with everything). 
Figure 1
: Thought plot comparing two participants from Study 1. The responses of S 147 (blue) 
on divergent thinking tasks were rated as more creative than those of S 71 (green). 
Study 2: A Representative Sample of Americans 
A representative sample of Americans in terms of age and socio-economic status 
completed the study via Qualtrics, who provided the sample via a “panel” (N = 581, 76% female, 
M
age
= 45.15, 
SD
age
= 15.69, 62 exclusions). Because we expected more measurement noise in 
the general public, we sought at least 80% power to detect an effect size between 
r
= .1 and 
r
= 
.15, achieved with approximately 500 participants. An online survey assessed forward flow and 
creativity—via the “novel uses,” “caption,” “similarity,” and “charity idea” tasks. Cognitive 
capacity was assessed with GRE Verbal questions and Raven’s matrices. 
Results
. As predicted, forward flow was positively associated with creativity ratings, 
r
(517) = .12, 
p
= .009, even when controlling for cognitive ability, 
β 
= .09, 
p 
= .036. 
Studies 3-5: Known Creative Groups Validation of Forward Flow 
Across the first two studies, forward flow in unconstrained thought was positively 
associated with creativity. Although many studies use these tasks, they have been criticized for 
not reflecting real-world creativity (Silvia et al., 2008). Studies 3-5 therefore use a known-groups 
paradigm to test links between forward flow and creativity in the real world: Do people with 
Forward Flow 12 
more real-world creativity have higher forward flow? And, can forward flow predict real-world 
creativity even when controlling for divergent thinking responses? We examined student 
performers (Study 3), and professional actors (Study 4) and entrepreneurs (Study 5). 
Study 3: Comparing Performance Students with Non-performance Students 
This study tested whether students in a traditionally “creative” major—dramatic 
performance majors who take acting, directing, and playwriting classes—have higher forward 
flow than non-performance students enrolled in a theatre history class. 
Participants were recruited from UNC Drama classes (N = 254, 57.6% female, 
M
age
= 
19.44, 
SD
age 
= 2.72)—122 from performance-major classes (e.g., Acting, Playwriting) and 132 
from a non-performance-major lecture-oriented class (Theatre History). Participants completed 
forward flow and the “novel uses” and “draw an alien” creativity tasks. Cognitive capacity was 
assessed with GRE Verbal questions and the CRT. There were 29 exclusions. For exploration, 
we collected forward flow at the semester’s end to examine test-retest reliability. 
Results
. As hypothesized, participants in performance-oriented classes had higher 
forward flow (
M
= .79, 
SD
= .04) than participants in a lecture-oriented class (
M 
= .76, 
SD
= 
.05), 
t
(223) = 4.93, 
p
< .001, 
d = 
0.66. Participants in performance-oriented classes also had 
more creative responses on the divergent thinking tasks (
M
= 2.02, 
SD
= .62) than participants in 
the lecture-oriented class (
M
= 1.54, 
SD
= .43), 
t
(223) = 6.80, 
p
< .001, 
d 
= .91, despite the fact 
that the two groups did not differ in overall cognitive ability, 
t
(223) = 1.18, 
p 
= .24. 
A logistic regression revealed that major type (performance vs. lecture) was significantly 
predicted by both forward flow, B = -10.10, SE = 3.44, 
p
= .003, and rated creativity, B = -1.52, 
SE = .32, 
p
< .001, but not cognitive capacity, 
p
= .73. Exploratory analyses suggest test-retest 
reliability in forward flow across the semester, 
r
(167) = .40, 
p
< .001, with end-of-semester 
forward flow higher in performance students compared with lecture students, 
t
(167) = 3.49, 
p
= 
.001. Forward flow is higher in creative (vs. non-creative) college majors, even controlling for 
cognitive capacity and divergent thinking responses. 
Study 4: Comparing Professional Actors with Internet Workers 
This study attempted to replicate the results of Study 3 with another creative group—
professional actors. As professional actors are required to be creative on a daily basis, we 
predicted they would have higher forward flow than a comparison group of internet workers. 
We recruited working actors (N = 52, 48% female, 
M
age
= 38.89
, SD
age
= 11.83) from the 
listserv of the Miller Voice Method Studio, a New York City company that trains people in 
presence, vocal clarity, and strength. Its listserv reaches 1000+ professional actors, with 
experience ranging from Broadway and Off-Broadway to Television and Film. We emailed the 
listserv 3 times to maximize sample size. As a comparison group, we recruited 100 Amazon 
Mechanical Turk workers (AMT; 29% female, 
M
age
= 32.88, 
SD
age
= 9.06—although 102 
completed the study). Power analyses suggested 80% power to detect an effect size of 
d 
= 0.43, 
Forward Flow 13 
but as the effect size in Study 3 was higher (
d
= 0.66), we felt we had sufficient power. Given the 
difficulty of recruiting professional actors, a condensed survey assessed only forward flow and 
creativity (via the “novel uses” and “caption” tasks). There were 48 exclusions. 
Results
. As predicted, professional actors had higher forward flow (
M 
= .83, 
SD
= .04) 
than AMT participants (
M 
= .79, 
SD 
= .04), 
t
(104) = 4.34, 
p
< .001, 
d
= 0.88, and scored higher 
on creativity measures (
M 
= 2.16, 
SD
= .51) than AMT participants (
M 
= 1.70, 
SD 
= .38), 
t
(104) 
= 5.33, 
p
< .001, 
d
= 1.08. 
A logistic regression revealed that sample group (actor vs. AMT) was significantly 
predicted by both forward flow, B = 20.29, SE = 6.56, and rated creativity, B = 2.11, SE = .56, 
p
s < .003. Of course, actors and AMT participants likely differ on many characteristics, but 
professional actors also have higher forward flow than our sample of amateur actors from the 
pilot (M = .78, SD = .054), 
t
(68) = 4.38, 
p 
< .001, 
d 
= 1.05. As professional and amateur actors 
performed similarly on divergent thinking tasks, 
t
(68) = 0.06, 
p
= .96, 
d
= 0.01, forward flow 
seems more strongly associated with professional acting success than standard creativity 
measures. 
This study again suggests that forward flow helps distinguish between highly creative and 
less creative groups of people, even when controlling for standard creativity measures.
Study 5: Comparing Professional Entrepreneurs with Professional Accountants 
This study compared samples of entrepreneurs and accountants. Both groups were mid-
career business professionals with similar education and financial standing (see below). 
However, because entrepreneurs often undertake creative ventures (Amabile, 1996; Schumpeter, 
1934), we predicted they would have higher forward flow than accountants. 
We recruited 159 entrepreneurs (25.8% female, 
M
age
= 54.53, 
SD
age
= 12.38) and 169 
accountants (44.4% female, 
M
age
= 50.73
, SD
age
= 12.92) via emails to UNC business school 
alumni, giving us 95% power to detect an effect size of 
d
= 0.36. There were 28 exclusions. 
Participants completed an online survey that assessed forward flow and creativity—via 
the “novel uses” and “charity” tasks. A manipulation check assessed how much they self-
identified as an entrepreneur (Liñán & Chen, 2009): entrepreneurs did self-identify more (
M 
= 
4.47, 
SD
= .67) than accountants (
M 
= 2.20, 
SD
= 1.24), 
t
(296) = 19.46, 
p
< .001, 
d
= 2.26. 
Participants also self-reported the importance of creativity, risk-taking, pivoting in 
business, financial performance, and financial wellbeing. A Varimax factor analysis revealed that 
these five measures formed two factors with eigenvalues above 1. The first three formed a 
risk/pivoting factor and the last two formed a financial success factor. All measures are listed in 
supplementary materials. 
Results
.
As predicted, entrepreneurs had higher forward flow (
M 
= .81, 
SD 
= .04) than 
accountants (
M 
= .79, 
SD
= .05), 
t
(296) = 3.70, 
p 
< .001, 
d
= 0.43. Entrepreneurs also scored 
higher on creativity measures (
M 
= 1.88, 
SD 
= .47) than accountants (
M 
= 1.77, 
SD 
= .34), t(296) 
Forward Flow 14 
= 2.43, 
p 
= .016, 
d
= 0.28. Entrepreneurs scored higher (M = 3.38, SD = .58) than accountants 
(M = 2.92, SD = .56) on risk/pivot, 
t
(296) = 6.93, 
p
< .001, 
d
= 0.80 but not on financial success, 
p
= .17. 
A logistic regression revealed that membership in the entrepreneur (as opposed to 
accountant) career group was significantly positively predicted by forward flow, 
B
= 9.21, 
SE
= 
3.04, and risk/pivot, 
B
= 1.39, 
SE
= .25, 
p
s < .003, significantly negatively predicted by financial 
success, 
B
= - .39, 
SE
= .19, 
p
< .04, and was not predicted by rated creativity on divergent 
thinking tasks, 
p
= .36. 
As in Studies 3-4, forward flow was higher in a real-world creative group (entrepreneurs 
vs. accountant) and predicted this group membership even controlling for other variables.
Figure 2
. Average forward flow and rated creativity on divergent thinking tasks, by sample and 
study (Studies 1-5).
Super-analysis: Combining All Data 
Given the variety of effect sizes across our previous studies, we now report results of a 
“super analysis” that includes all participants from Studies 1-5 as well as the pilot study. Unlike 
a traditional meta-analysis, which combines effect sizes of individual studies, this analysis 
combines all forward flow and creativity ratings into one sample, allowing us to capitalize on the 
large diversity among samples. Across all participants (
N 
= 1397), forward flow was positively 
associated with creativity, 
r
(1395) = .19, 
p 
< .001, even when controlling for cognitive capacity 
in the studies that measured it (Studies 1, 2, and 3), 
β 
= .20, t(958) = 6.49, 
p 
< .001. See Figure 2 
for a bar graph comparing the average forward flow and creativity ratings of all samples and 
Figure 3 for a scatterplot of all forward flow and creativity ratings. 
Forward Flow 15 
As a robustness check, we replicated our analysis using multilevel techniques, regressing 
creativity on forward flow while controlling for cognitive capacity and between-study variation 
(i.e., for the fact that participants are nested within studies). We used a linear mixed effects 
model where study sample was considered a random effect. Specifically, each sample contributes 
to the predicted value of a random intercept, assumed to be independently and identically drawn 
from a normal distribution with a mean of zero and unknown variance. As expected, the effect of 
forward flow on creativity remained positive and significant, 
b 
= 1.89, 
SE
= .30; 
p
< .001. 
Figure 3
: Forward flow and ratings of creativity in divergent thinking tasks across all 
participants in Studies 1-5 (N = 1395) 
Study 6: Predicting Creative Achievement from Twitter Posts 
To examine the predictive power of forward flow in a more naturalistic, real-world 
context, Study 6 tested whether the forward flow of celebrities’ Twitter streams predicted the 
scope of their creative achievements. We suggest this study is especially useful for two reasons. 
First, it extends the predictive ability of forward flow to big data. Second, it addresses the 
(unlikely) possibility that participants may have been trying to generate outlandish associations 
to seem creative (i.e., “cheat” the measure of forward flow), even though they were not 
instructed to do so. Users on Twitter are not instructed to free associate nor are their tweets 
(often spanning across years) likely to be generated by concerns of maximizing semantic 
distance. 
We developed an online Twitter application using Python code to analyze the forward 
flow of up to 3200 tweets (the maximum allowed for download) from each of the 100 most-
Forward Flow 16 
followed Twitter users, including Jimmy Fallon, former President Barack Obama, and Kim 
Kardashian (see supplementary materials for complete list).
4
Our LSA engine was adapted to 
calculate the forward flow from a sequence of tweets, creating a composite score for each 
tweeter. There were 5 exclusions based on outliers of forward flow or unprocessable words. 
To assess creativity, three coders (α = .77) blind to hypotheses completed the Creative 
Achievements Questionnaire (CAQ; Carson, Peterson, & Higgins, 2005) for each Twitter user. 
Although the CAQ is typically a self-report measure, here we used third-person ratings. 
Results
.
As predicted, forward flow predicted Twitter users’ CAQ score, 
r
(95) = .22, 
p 
= 
.035. See Figure 4 for example thought plots comparing Ariana Grande and the Dalai Lama. 
These results suggest further promise for the predictive power of forward flow. 
Figure 4: 
Forward flow across a sample of tweets from Ariana Grande (red) and the Dalai Lama 
(blue).
The higher flow of Grande reflects greater semantic evolution across posts. 
General Discussion 
Our everyday subjective experience can be likened to a stream of thoughts, flowing freely 
over time (James, 1890); however, modern psychological studies frequently measure task-bound 
thoughts at a single point time. While focused measures of thoughts are undoubtedly useful, it 
4
We note that these data were collected in the summer of 2016, before Twitter restricted the available tweets for 
download to include only the last 6 days (and also before the election of Donald Trump). 
Forward Flow 17 
may also be worth studying the dynamic unfolding of unconstrained thought. In this paper, we 
provide a metric that captures the semantic evolution of relatively free thought as represented by 
free association—a metric called “forward flow.” Consistent with links between creativity and 
free thought (as captured by default network activity; Beaty et al., 2016), we suggest that forward 
flow also predicts creativity. 
Across multiple studies, forward flow was associated with creativity as assessed by both 
well-validated tasks and real-world career trajectories. Studies 1-2 revealed that forward flow 
was positively associated with people’s ability to provide creative answers on divergent thinking 
tasks, even controlling for cognitive ability. Studies 3-5 revealed that forward flow predicts more 
creative college major and careers, even controlling for creativity in divergent thinking tasks. A 
super-analysis examined forward flow metrics across all participants and samples and revealed a 
robust relationship between forward flow and ratings of creativity. Study 6 revealed the 
predictive power of forward flow within a truly naturalistic context: Twitter. The semantic 
evolution of tweets predicted assessments of celebrities’ creative achievements. The utility of 
forward flow is further advanced by a suite of open-access web resources, which can be used for 
both demonstrative purposes and large-scale data analyses. 
Caveats 
We recognize creativity is multifaceted and its breadth cannot be reduced to a single 
metric. Indeed, the point of these studies is not to argue that forward flowing thought is the best 
predictor of creativity, but instead to provide a proof of concept for an important addition to 
researchers’ toolboxes. Combined with other metrics of unconstrained thought—such as mind-
wandering (Smallwood & Schooler, 2015), speed of thought (Pronin & Jacobs, 2008), or 
vividness of imagery (McKelvie, 1995)—forward flow may help scientists quantify the various 
dimensions of subjective experience. 
We also recognize potential issues with forward flow. First, forward flow captures only 
one aspect of free thought, and there may be other ways to quantify the richness of naturalistic 
thought. Second, as with any individual difference measure (Paulhus, 1984), people can “cheat” 
on forward flow. For example, it is possible to increase forward flow by deliberately trying to 
generate random words. Because forward flow is a measure designed to capture unconstrained 
thought, it will likely not be diagnostic if thoughts are deliberately bent on generating 
randomness. Forward flow may also be less predictive if contaminated by task-bound thoughts, 
and so should generally be assessed via free-association at the very beginning of a study session. 
Beyond Creativity 
Forward flow may predict creativity, but it should not be thought of as merely a creativity 
measure. Instead, we suggest the semantic dynamics of thought may predict other phenomena 
across scales of human behavior. At the level of the brain, forward flow may predict neural 
dynamics such as connectivity between intrinsic neural networks related to memory and 
emotion, because semantic associations help to trigger (and are triggered by) episodic memories 
Forward Flow 18 
(Baddeley, 2007) and affective content (e.g., being positive or negative; Lindquist et al., 2012). 
The affective content of naturalistic thoughts may also allow forward flow to predict 
emotional trajectories, such as mania (high forward flow) and depressive rumination (low 
forward flow), consistent with work that links mood with both “mental progression” (Mason & 
Bar, 2012) and free association breadth (Brunyé, Gagnon, Paczynski, Shenhav, Mahoney, & 
Taylor, 2013). Forward flow may predict other individual-level variables: In therapeutic writing, 
it could predict post-traumatic growth (Pennebaker, 1997; Woodward & Joseph, 2003), and in 
life narratives, it could predict flourishing (McAdams, 1997). Forward flow could predict the 
quality of gut decisions in complex situations (Hayashi, 2001), someone’s adaptability to new 
situations (Pulakos, Arad, Donovan, & Plamondon, 2000), and leadership ability—as all require 
dynamic adjustment over time. Indeed, James (1880) believed that “great men” have high 
forward flow. 
At the level of groups, the forward flow of meetings may predict their productiveness, as 
discussions that keep spiralling around the same topic are likely to be less than useful. 
Relatedly—but at a larger scale—forward flow in congressional sessions could predict their level 
of accomplishments and the resultant appproval ratings. Across large scales of time, forward 
flow in fiction books may predict the vitality of the arts and forward flow in scientific abstracts 
may predict the vitality of science. Even within single creative products, forward flow could 
predict whether a book’s plot seems compelling or whether a play’s characters seem dynamic. 
More generally, forward flow provides a new metric for scholars who use naturalistic language 
processing to predict behavior (e.g., Pennebaker, 2011; Packard & Berger, 2016). By examining 
the evolution of semantics, forward flow may explain additional variance. 
Linear or Non-Linear? Forward Flow and Mental Illness 
One important remaining question is whether the relationship between forward flow and 
creativity is linear. Some psychological disorders are characterized by disorganized thoughts 
(e.g., schizophrenia; Moritz, Woodward, Küppers, Lausen, & Schickel, 2003); and while such 
disorganization likely yields high forward flow, it may not yield high creativity—especially 
insofar as creativity requires usefulness in addition to originality (Runco & Jaeger, 2012). While 
there are robust correlations between mental illness and creativity (Kyaga et al., 2013), even our 
most creative samples—acting students and creative professionals—had a mean forward flow of 
~.83, which is some distance from the theoretical maximum of 1.00. It may be that a completely 
disorganized stream of consciousness represented by extreme forward flow is tied to detriments 
in creative performance. If true, this suggests forward flow—at its upper bounds—might also be 
a useful indicator of some kinds of mental illness, consistent with recent work on atypicality in 
semantic memory structure (Faust & Kenett, 2014). Moreover, although we have suggested high 
forward flow helps creativity, it may hinder task performance when focus is required—e.g., for 
air traffic controllers or pilots (Kanfer & Ackerman, 1989). 
Forward Flow 19 
Conclusion 
More than a century ago, William James suggested that our mental lives may be best 
understood as a stream of thoughts. The idea of “forward flow” both formalizes this insight and 
quantifies the classic technique of free association so that free thought can be easily assessed in 
modern psychology. As a demonstration of the utility of free thought, our studies revealed that 
forward flow predicts creativity across diverse domains. Beyond creativity, there are likely many 
ways in which the dynamics of free thought are predictive; perhaps the drifting thoughts of an 
idle mind can be put to work. 
Forward Flow 20 
Author Note 
For assistance and advice, we thank Mary Smith, Emmie Banks, Caroline Fletcher, Emily 
Pender, Keith Sawyer, Neil Hester, Salvatore Affinito, and Emily Kubin. This research is funded 
by a grant from the Imagination Institute via the John Templeton Foundation (RFP-15-11). This 
research has been presented previously as a poster at SPSP 2017 and at the Imagination Institute 
Capstone Conference. 
Forward Flow 21 
References 
Amabile, T. M. (1996). 
Creativity and innovation in organizations
(Vol. 5). Boston, MA: 
Harvard Business School. 
Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. H. (1974). A propositional theory of recognition memory. 
Memory 
& Cognition, 2
(3), 406-412. 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Huang, C., & Buckner, R. (2010). Evidence for the default 
network’s role in spontaneous cognition. 
Journal of Neurophysiology, 104,
322-350. 
Baddeley, A. (2007). 
Working Memory, Thought, and Action
. OUP Oxford. 
Baer, J., & Kaufman, J. C. (2005). Bridging generality and specificity: The amusement park 
theoretical (APT) model of creativity. 
Roeper Review
, 
27
(3), 158–163. 
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Silvia, P. J., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). Creative cognition and brain 
network dynamics. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
, 20(2), 87–95. 
Beaty, R. E., Kenett, Y. N., Christensen, A. P., Rosenberg, M. D., Benedek, M., Chen, Q., Fink, 
A., Qiu, J., Kwapil, T. R., Kane, M. J., & Silvia, P. J. (2018). Robust prediction of 
individual creative ability from brain functional connectivity. 
Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 115
(5), 1087-1092. 
Brunyé, T. T., Gagnon, S. A., Paczynski, M., Shenhav, A., Mahoney, C. R., & Taylor, H. A. 
(2013). Happiness by association: Breadth of free association influences affective states. 
Cognition, 127(1), 93-98. 
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). The brain’s default network. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1124
(1), 1-38. 
Carson, S. H., Peterson, J. B., & Higgins, D. M. (2005). Reliability, validity, and factor structure 
of the creative achievement questionnaire. 
Creativity Research Journal
, 
17
(1), 37–50. 
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., & Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-
wandering as spontaneous thought: a dynamic framework. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
17
(11), 718-731. 
Csikszentmihályi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: Harper & 
Row. 
De Deyne, S., Kenett, Y. N., Anaki, D., Faust, M., & Navarro, D. J. (2016). Large-scale network 
representations of semantics in the mental lexicon. In M. N. Jones (Ed.), 
Big data in 
cognitive science: From methods to insights
(pp. 174-202). New York, NY: Psychology 
Press: Taylor & Francis. 
Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T. K., & Harshman, R. (1990). Indexing 
by latent semantic analysis. 
Journal of the American Society for Information Science
, 
41
(6), 391. 
Forward Flow 22 
Epstein, S. (1994). Integration of the cognitive and the psychodynamic unconscious. 
American 
Psychologist, 49
(8), 709-725. 
Farber, S. K. (2005). Free association reconsidered: The talking cure, the writing cure. 
The 
Journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis and Dynamic Psychiatry, 33
(2), 
249-273. 
Faust, M., & Kenett, Y. N. (2014). Rigidity, chaos and integration: hemispheric interaction and 
individual differences in metaphor comprehension. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience
, 
8
. 
Fiske, S. T. (1992). Thinking is for doing: Portraits of social cognition from daguerreotype to 
laserphoto. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63
(6), 877-889. 
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision making. 
The Journal of Economic 
Perspectives
, 
19
(4), 25. 
Freud, S. (2013). 
The Interpretation of Dreams
. Read Books Ltd. 
Gruberger, M., Simon, E. B., Levkovitz, Y., Zangen, A., & Hendler, T. (2011). Towards a 
neuroscience of mind-wandering. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 5, 
56. 
Guilford, J. P. (1950). Creativity. 
American Psychologist
, 
5
(9), 444–454. 
Hass, R. W. (2017). Semantic search during divergent thinking. 
Cognition, 166
, 344-357. 
Hayashi, A. M. (2001). When to trust your gut. 
Harvard Business Review
, 
79
(2), 59–65. 
Heinen, D. J. P., & Johnson, D. R. (2017). Semantic distance: An automated measure of 
creativity that is novel and appropriate. 
Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts
. 
James, W. (1880, October). Great men, great thoughts, and the environment. Atlantic Monthly, 
46, 441-459. 
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology. New York, NY: Henry Holt and Company. 
Joffe, H., & Elsey, J. W. B. (2014). Free association in psychology and the grid elaboration 
method. 
Review of General Psychology
, 
18
(3), 173–185. 
Jones, E., Oliphant, T., & Peterson, P. (2014). ${$SciPy$}$: open source scientific tools for 
${$Python$}$. 
Jung, R., Mead, B., Carrasco, J., & Flores, R. (2013). The structure of creative cognition in the 
human brain. 
NeuroImage, 8, 
418-430. 
Kanfer, R., & Ackerman, P. L. (1989). Motivation and cognitive abilities: an 
integrative/aptitude-treatment interaction approach to skill acquisition. 
Journal of Applied 
Psychology
, 
74
(4), 657–690. 
Kaufman, S. B., Quilty, L. C., Grazioplene, R. G., Hirsh, J. B., Gray, J. R., Peterson, J. B., & 
DeYoung, C. G. (2016). Openness to experience and intellect differentially predict 
creative achievement in the arts and sciences. 
Journal of Personality
, 
84
(2), 248–258. 
Forward Flow 23 
Kenett, Y. N., Anaki, D., & Faust, M. (2014). Investigating the structure of semantic networks in 
low and high creative persons. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 
407. 
Kenett, Y. N., Levi, E., Anaki, D., & Faust, M. (2017). The semantic distance task: Quantifying 
semantic distance with semantic network path length. 
Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 43
(9), 1470-1489. 
Kucyi, A., & Davis, K. D. (2014). Dynamic functional connectivity of the default mode network 
tracks daydreaming. 
NeuroImage, 100
, 471-480. 
Kyaga, S., Landén, M., Boman, M., Hultman, C. M., Långström, N., & Lichtenstein, P. (2013). 
Mental illness, suicide and creativity: 40-Year prospective total population study. 
Journal 
of Psychiatric Research
, 
47
(1), 83–90. 
Liñán, F., & Chen, Y. W. (2009). Development and cross
‐
cultural application of a specific 
instrument to measure entrepreneurial intentions. 
Entrepreneurship theory and practice
, 
33(3), 593-617. 
Lindquist, K. A., Wager, T. D., Kober, H., Bliss-Moreau, E., & Barrett, L. F. (2012). The brain 
basis of emotion: a meta-analytic review. 
The Behavioral and Brain Sciences
, 
35
(3), 
121–143. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X11000446 
Lucas, B. J., & Nordgren, L. F. (2015). People underestimate the value of persistence for creative 
performance. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
, 
109
(2), 232. 
Marron, T., & Faust, M. (2018). Free association, divergent thinking, and creativity: Cognitive 
and neural perspectives. In O. Vartanian & R. E. Jung (Eds.), 
The Cambridge Handbook 
of the Neuroscience of Creativity
(pp. 261-280). New York, NY: Cambridge University. 
Marron, T. R., Lerner, Y., Berant, E., Kinreich, S., Shapira-Lichter, I., Hendler, T., & Faust, M. 
(2018). Chain Free Association, Creativity, and the Default Mode Network. 
Neuropsychologia. 
Mason, M. F., & Bar, M. (2012). The effect of mental progression on mood. 
Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General
, 
141
(2), 217. 
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. 
(2007). Wandering minds: The default network and stimulus-independent thought. 
Science, 315
(5810), 393-395. 
Mazoyer, P., Zago, L., Mellet, E., Bricogne, S., Etard, O. ,Houdé, O., ,... & Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. 
(2001). Cortical networks for working memory and executive function sustain the 
conscious resting state in man. 
Brain Research Bulletin, 54
, 287-298. 
McAdams, D. P. (1993). 
The Stories we Live by: Personal Myths and the Making of the Self
. 
New York, NY: William Morrow and Company. 
McKelvie, S. J. (1995). The VVIQ as a psychometric test of individual differences in visual 
imagery vividness: A critical quantitative review and plea for direction. 
Journal of 
Forward Flow 24 
Mental Imagery
, 
19
, 1–106. 
Mednick, S. (1962). The associative basis of the creative process. 
Psychological Review
, 
69
(3), 
220–232. 
Moritz, S., Woodward, T. S., Küppers, D., Lausen, A., & Schickel, M. (2003). Increased 
automatic spreading of activation in thought-disordered schizophrenic patients. 
Schizophrenia Research
, 
59
(2), 181–186. 
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Dennis, S. (2000). What is free association and what does it 
measure? 
Memory & Cognition, 28
(6), 887-899. 
Packard, G., & Berger, J. (2016). How language shapes word of mouth’s impact. 
Journal of 
Marketing Research
, 
54
(4), 572–588. 
Paulhaus, D. L. (1984). Two-component models of socially desirable responding. 
Personality 
Processes and Individual Differences, 46
(3), 598-609.
Pennebaker, J. W. (1997). Writing about emotional experiences as a therapeutic process. 
Psychological Science
, 
8
(3), 162–166. 
Pennebaker, J. W. (2011). 
The secret life of pronouns: How our words reflect who we are
. New 
York, NY: Bloomsbury. 
Perry-Smith, J. E., & Shalley, C. E. (2003). The social side of creativity: A static and dynamic 
social network perspective. 
The Academy of Management Review, 28
(1), 89-106. 
Pronin, E., & Jacobs, E. (2008). Thought speed, mood, and the experience of mental motion. 
Perspectives on Psychological Science
, 
3
(6), 461–485. 
Pulakos, E. D., Arad, S., Donovan, M. A., & Plamondon, K. E. (2000). Adaptability in the 
workplace: development of a taxonomy of adaptive performance. 
The Journal of Applied 
Psychology
, 
85
(4), 612–624. 
Raven, J. (2000). The Raven’s progressive matrices: change and stability over culture and time. 
Cognitive Psychology
, 
41
(1), 1–48. 
Rehurek, R., & Sojka, P. (2010). Software framework for topic modelling with large corpora. In 
In 
Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks
. 
Rudowicz, E. (2003). Creativity and culture: A two way interaction. 
Scandinavian Journal of 
Educational Research, 47
(3), 272-290. 
Runco, M. A., & Acar, S. (2012). Divergent thinking as an indicator of creative potential. 
Creativity Research Journal
, 
24
(1), 66–75. 
Runco, M. A., & Jaeger, G. J. (2012). The standard definition of creativity. 
Creativity Research 
Journal
, 
24
(1), 92–96. 
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934). Change and the Entrepreneur. 
Essays of JA Schumpeter
. 
Forward Flow 25 
Silvia, P. J. (2015). Intelligence and creativity are pretty similar after all. 
Educational 
Psychology Review
, 
27
(4), 599–606. 
Silvia, P. J., Winterstein, B. P., Willse, J. T., Barona, C. M., Cram, J. T., Hess, K. I., … Richard, 
C. A. (2008). Assessing creativity with divergent thinking tasks: Exploring the reliability 
and validity of new subjective scoring methods. 
Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and 
the Arts
, 
2
(2), 68. 
Simonton, D. K. (2015). On praising convergent thinking: Creativity as blind variation and 
selective retention. 
Creativity Research Journal
, 
27
(3), 262–270. 
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind wandering: empirically navigating 
the stream of consciousness. 
Annual Review of Psychology
, 
66
, 487–518. 
Spreng, R. N., & Grady, C. L. (2010). Patterns of brain activity supporting autobiographical 
memory prospection, and theory of mind, and their relationship to the default mode 
network. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22
(6), 1112-1123. 
Spreng, R. N., Mar, R. A., & Kim, A. S. (2009). The common neural basis of autobiographical 
memory, prospection, navigation, theory of mind, and the default mode: A quantitative 
meta-analysis. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21
(3), 489-510.
Stark, J., Kogler, C., Gaisbauer, H., Sedmak, C., & Kirchler, E. (2016). Differentiating views of 
inheritance: The free association task as a method to assess social representations of 
wealth, inherit, and bequeath. 
Review of Behavioral Economics
, 
3
(1), 91–111. 
Ștefănescu, D., Banjade, R., & Rus, V. (2014). Latent semantic analysis models on wikipedia 
and tasa. In 
Language Resources Evaluation Conference (LREC)
. 
Tamir, D. I., Bricker, A. B., Dodell-Feder, D., & Mitchell, J. P. (2016). Reading fiction and 
reading minds: the role of simulation in the default network. 
Social Cognitive and 
Affective Neuroscience
, 
11
(2), 215–224. https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsv114 
Tamir, D. I., & Mitchell, J. P. (2011). The default network distinguishes construals of proximal 
versus distal events. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
, 
23
(10), 2945–2955. 
Torrance, E. (1972). Predictive validity of the Torrance tests of creative thinking. 
The Journal of 
Creative Behavior
, 
6
(4), 236–262. 
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). 
The embodied mind: Cognitive science and 
human experience. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 
Wallach, M. A., & Kogan, N. (1965). A new look at the creativity-intelligence distinction. 
Journal of Personality, 33
(3), 348-369. 
Ward, T. B. (1994). Structured imagination: The role of category structure in exemplar 
generation. 
Cognitive Psychology
, 
27
(1), 1–40. 
Westen, D. (1999). The scientific status of unconscious processes: Is Freud really dead? 
Journal 
Forward Flow 26 
of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 47
(4), 1061-1106. 
Woodward, C., & Joseph, S. (2003). Positive change processes and post-traumatic growth in 
people who have experienced childhood abuse: understanding vehicles of change. 
Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice
, 
76
(3), 267–283. 
Zedelius, C. M., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). Mind wandering “Ahas” versus mindful reasoning: 
alternative routes to creative solutions. 
Frontiers in Psychology
, 
6
. 
