1 
Running Head: THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
Think of the Consequences: A Decade of Discourse About Same-Sex Marriage 
Babak Hemmatian 
Brown University 
Sabina J. Sloman 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Uriel Cohen Priva and Steven A. Sloman 
Brown University 
Author Note 
Babak Hemmatian, Department of Cognitive, Linguistic and Psychological Sciences, 
Brown University; Sabina J. Sloman, Department of Social and Decision Sciences, Carnegie 
Mellon University; Steven A. Sloman, Department of Cognitive, Linguistic and Psychological 
Sciences, Brown University; Uriel Cohen Priva, Department of Cognitive, Linguistic and 
Psychological Sciences, Brown University. 
This publication was made possible through a grant from the Intellectual Humility in 
Public Discourse Project at the University of Connecticut and the John Templeton Foundation. 
Correspondence should be addressed to Babak Hemmatian, Department of Cognitive, 
Linguistic and Psychological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02906. Email: 
Babak_Hemmatian@Brown.edu. Phone: (401)680-3879. 
Word count: 5102 words (excluding title, references, author affiliations and note, 
acknowledgments, appendices, figures and figure legends)
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
2 
Abstract 
Approaching issues through the lens of non-negotiable values increases the perceived 
intractability of debate (Baron & Spranca, 1997). Focusing on concrete consequences 
of policies instead could result in the moderation of extreme opinions (Fernbach et al., 
2012) and greater resolution of conflict (Baron & Leshner, 2000). Using comments on the 
popular social media platform Reddit from January 2006 until September 2017, we show that 
changes in the framing of same-sex marriage in public discourse go hand-in-hand with changes 
in public opinion. We use a topic model to show that the contribution of values-based topics to 
the debate increased prior to a rise in public support for same-sex marriage among a majority of 
Americans (Gallup, 2017), and declined afterwards. Discussion of concrete consequences (e.g. 
the impact of politicians’ stances) remained stable over the past decade and topics that do not 
predominantly address either broad consequences or protected values became more frequent (for 
instance, sharing of personal LGBT-themed anecdotes). Taken together, these trends suggest 
progressively less values-based framing of the issue after mid-2012, possibly contributing to the 
increasingly positive societal attitudes. While our results are correlational, they reinforce the 
meaningfulness of protected values and consequentialism as dimensions along which to describe 
public discourse surrounding important social issues. 
Keywords: Protected values, consequentialism, Same-sex marriage, Latent Dirichlet 
Allocation, Reddit
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
3 
Introduction 
A good negotiator will acknowledge their opponent’s most basic values, but not try to 
change them (Atran, Axelrod, & Davis, 2007). All but the most transactional of us have 
protected or sacred values that we regard as non-negotiable (Baron & Spranca, 1997). Protected 
values are deontological in Kant’s (1797) sense: They are prescriptions or prohibitions regarding 
actions; they are not concerned as much with outcomes. Many refuse to consider abortion 
because they believe that the act is murder, and they possess a protected value that prohibits 
murder, regardless of the consequences of aborting or not aborting. Attitudes can often be shaped 
by protected values even when people are observed making trade-offs; we use various strategies 
to justify violating own deeply-held moral principles (Baron & Leshner, 2000; Tetlock, 2003). 
When two sides with incommensurable protected values are debating policy, focusing on 
those values is not likely to help achieve conciliation. Indeed, highlighting protected values 
hardens attitudes. Dehghani and colleagues (2009) have argued that the Iranian government 
managed to obtain support from their citizenry to start a nuclear program by launching a 
campaign to frame possession of a nuclear industry to be an inalienable right. 
A more promising approach to overcoming policy divides is to focus on the 
consequences of the policy (Baron & Spranca, 1997): Asking people what the likely outcomes of 
a policy are makes them more open to compromise. This type of consequentialist reasoning is a 
kind of causal reasoning: It is concerned with the effects of policies, the probabilities of those 
effects, and how good or bad they are (a different type of value)
1
. Tanner, Medin, and Iliev 
(2007) have shown this empirically: They probed people’s deontological vs. consequentialist 
1
Of course, any judgment about the downstream effects of a policy is ultimately rooted in some kind of value we 
hold about what consequences are more or less desirable. We hold the position prevalent in the literature that the 
distinction between rhetoric appealing to the moral principle expressed by a policy itself and rhetoric appealing to 
the causal chain of events a policy induces is discursively and cognitively meaningful. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
4 
orientations and their protected values and found that protected values tended to be more aligned 
with deontological than consequentialist orientation. 
One reason that reasoning about protected values makes disputes intractable is that it 
simplifies--and often oversimplifies--the issues. Fernbach, Min, and Sloman (2018) found that 
the degree to which individuals assume protected-values-based over consequentialist orientations 
towards a given issue predicts how well they think they understand that issue, as well as how 
intractable they consider it and how extreme their opinion is. Inducing a consequentialist 
perspective can reveal to people how limited their understanding is. Following Rozenblit and 
Keil (2002), Fernbach and colleagues (2012) found that asking people to explain the mechanism 
by which a policy would lead to some consequence modulated their own sense of understanding. 
It also made them slightly less extreme in their attitude toward the policy. This adds to the 
empirical evidence suggesting that when it comes to facilitating open-mindedness and 
compromise, consequentialist perspectives trump protected values perspectives. 
Protected-values-based vs. consequentialist discourse 
This brief review suggests that protected values and consequentialist perspectives are, to 
at least some extent, matters of framing. Many people are able to assume both perspectives on 
many issues. This leads to the guiding hypothesis of this paper: Framing issues in public 
discourse as consequentialist, rather than as grounded in protected values, goes hand-in-hand 
with collective attitude shifts on those issues. 
We focus on the issue of same-sex marriage because attitudes toward same-sex marriage 
have changed considerably over the past decade (Gallup, 2017). According to the Pew Research 
Center, 35% of Americans favored same-sex marriage in 2001, while 62% did in 2017 (Pew 
Research Center, 2017). The shift in attitudes has licensed major politicians to come out in 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
5 
support of same-sex marriage in recent years, as Democrats Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama 
did in 2012 and 2013, respectively. Republicans like Rob Portman and Jon Huntsman also 
changed their public positions in 2013. The issue came to a head in the United States on June 26, 
2015, when the Supreme Court ruled on Obergefell v. Hodges that the constitution guarantees a 
right to same-sex marriage. 
We hypothesize that the shift in public attitudes surrounding same-sex marriage is 
accompanied by a shift in public discourse away from talk about issues related to protected 
values (like the biblical definition of marriage, or the fundamental right to marry who one wants) 
towards talk about concrete consequences and the causal processes that lead to them (e.g. 
slippery slope arguments associated with changing the definition of marriage, or expressed 
concern for the welfare of children raised by same-sex parents). In keeping with the evidence 
that, relative to protected-values-based discourse, consequentialist conversation leads people to 
see the complexity of issues, to reduce their hubris, to focus on the outcomes of a policy rather 
than on their personal opinion, to see the possibility of compromise and to engage in less 
polarized reasoning, we expected that shifts towards consequentialist discourse would correlate 
with changes in opinion. 
Naturally, the relative amount of consequentialist versus protected-values discourse is not 
the only factor governing public conversation. Specific events related to the topic can also have a 
substantial effect. For instance, the Supreme Court decision on same-sex marriage may have a 
measurable influence on what people talked about. Nevertheless, modulo these other factors, we 
expect that as attitudes towards same-sex marriage became more positive over time, we will see 
less conversation about protected values and more conversation about the consequences of 
policies and the causal processes leading to those consequences. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
6 
Whether or not our hypothesis is correct is an empirical question. There is a very credible 
alternative suggested by Justice Anthony Kennedy writing for the majority in the Obergefell v. 
Hodges case: “No longer may this liberty be denied,” a clear framing of a pro-same-sex marriage 
position in terms of protected values. This illustrates that the shift in attitudes, rather than 
reflecting a shift from protected-values to consequentialist conversation, could reflect a shift 
from one kind of protected-values frame to another. We know that people tend to rely on 
protected values frames because they are unable to generate convincing consequentialist frames 
(Sloman & Fernbach, 2017). Moreover, others have argued that changes in opinion are governed 
by changes in how policies are framed (Lakoff, 2004). So, it is a distinct possibility that changes 
in attitude toward same-sex marriage are accompanied by a shift from anti-same-sex marriage 
protected values frame (e.g., a religious one) to a pro-same-sex marriage protected values frame 
(like Kennedy’s). The empirical work we report is designed to reveal how discourse about same-
sex marriage has changed over the past decade. 
Methods 
We use natural language text from conversations on the popular social media platform 
Reddit
1
to track the evolution of the discourse surrounding same-sex marriage over the past 
decade. We chose Reddit because it is the fourth most visited website in the United States 
(according to official estimates retrieved from www.redditinc.com) and comments shared on this 
platform have been used in the past to uncover the determinants of changes in opinions (Tan, 
Niculae, Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil and Lee, 2016). We use a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) 
model to identify salient themes (topics) interwoven throughout more than ten years of 
comments relating to same-sex marriage and calculate the relative contribution of each topic. We 
then identify topics that pass a threshold for significant contribution to the model (top topics) and 
1
https://www.reddit.com/ 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
7 
use the highest probability words in each topic to classify them as consequentialist, values-based 
or neutral. We then track the evolution of the contributions for the chosen topics over time.
1
Data 
Using all comments on Reddit from January 2006 until September 2017
2
, we created a 
corpus of comments matching a regular expression containing positively and negatively valenced 
words and phrases related to same-sex marriage (see Appendix A). Quotes and hierarchical 
dependencies between the comments were ignored. We then coerced all comments in our corpus 
to lowercase, lemmatized terms and removed HTML escape codes, stop words, extremely rare or 
ubiquitous terms and non-alphanumeric characters. We used the lemmatizer and set of stopwords 
from Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK; Bird, Loper & Klein, 2009), but around twenty words 
with possible relevance to protected values or consequentialist framing were retained (see 
Appendix A). Our corpus contains 603,282 comments (15,711,221 words in total, comprised of 
32925 unique words) with a mean length of 26 words (median = 20, SD = 24.99). 
Figure 1 shows the number of comments included in the dataset from each year. Most of 
the comments come from later years, despite the fact that the percentage of comments on the 
website that are associated with same-sex marriage has decreased over time. 
1
Python code used in this study is openly available at: 
https://github.com/BabakHemmatian/Gay_Marriage_Corpus_Study 
2
Access provided by http://files.pushshift.io/reddit/comments 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
8 
Figure 1. Number of posts on Reddit per year that are relevant to same-sex marriage, as determined by our regular expression 
(see Appendix A). 
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). Latent Dirichlet Allocation is a generative 
hierarchical Bayesian model of discrete data (Blei, Ng & Jordan, 2003). The model is applied to 
a set of collections of discrete data (a set of documents composed of a set of words) in order to 
recover latent dimensions (topics) that reflect statistical regularities among the words in each 
document. The structure of an LDA model lends itself naturally to recovering generally 
interpretable recurrent themes in natural language text that is organized into separable chunks 
(Griffiths, Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2007). For our purposes, each Reddit comment is considered 
a document. 
An LDA model is uniquely characterized by a set of words 
, a set of 
topics 
, and 
hyperparameters 
and 
. 
, 
and 
are free parameters: their values are up to the discretion of 
the modeler. LDA models the generative process of each document as follows: First, a 
multinomial distribution 
~ Dirichlet(
) over topic indices 
{
∶ 
∈ [1,
]}
is defined. To 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
9 
determine each word 
∈
in the document, a topic index 
is drawn from 
. Finally, 
is 
drawn from the probability distribution defined by 
(Blei et. al., 2003; Hoffman, Blei, & Bach, 
2010). In short, each document is characterized as a probability distribution over topics, and each 
topic is characterized as a probability distribution over words. 
We use a freely-available and open-source implementation of an online variational Bayes 
algorithm (Hoffman et. al., 2010) to train an LDA model on our corpus and to query the resultant 
model (Řehůřek & Sojka, 2010). The estimation procedure for 
is beyond the scope of this 
paper; for more information, see Blei et. al. (2003) and Hoffman et. al. (2010). Following Cohen 
Priva and Austerweil (2015), 
and 
were set to 0.1, which encourages the model to represent 
each document as composed of only a few topics and to assign high probability to only a few 
words for a certain topic. For the complete list of implementation-specific hyperparameters, see 
Appendix B. We set 
= 50
(number of topics) after informal inspection of the trained model’s 
topics suggested more interpretable results for this value than for 
=
25, 75 or 100. Inspection 
consisted of looking at the 80 most probable words from each top topic. Similar inspections for 
n= 45 and 55 suggested that our results are stable for similar numbers of topics and not an 
artifact of the exact value used. The choice for 
was made before the rest of the analysis 
presented in this paper was conducted. Measures of predictiveness and robustness calculated for 
the model can be found in Appendix B. 
We then identified the most probable topics (top topics) by calculating the relative overall 
contribution of each of the 50 topics to the model, and choosing topics contributing more than 
3%. This value was chosen to be somewhat higher than the probability of each topic given a 
uniform distribution over topics. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
10 
Calculating topic contributions. Following Cohen Priva and Austerweil (2015), the 
monthly contribution of topic 
(for
∈ [1,
]
) to the model was defined as 
(
) = 
|
|
∑
|{
∈ 
∶ 
(
) 
}|
|
|
∈
(1) 
where 
is a word in document d, d is a document represented as an unordered bag of words in 
(the set of documents from month m), and topic(
z
) stands for the most likely topic for 
given the prior distribution over topics and the other words present in d. In calculating the norm 
of documents, only words were counted for which the conditional probability of at least one 
topic was more than 0.01. The overall topic contribution of a topic 
is the empirical mean of its 
contribution to all months in the dataset
1
. 
Categorizing topics as consequentialist vs. values-based. To establish whether top 
topics were representative of consequentialist discourse, values-based discourse, or neither, we 
first queried the 80 words that had the highest probabilities under each topic. We then identified 
words only present in the high probability set for each top topic (unique) or shared with at most 
one other top topic (almost unique). See Appendix C for the resulting sets. We used shared 
properties among the unique and almost unique sets to characterize the theme represented by 
each topic. 
To confirm that the model is not uncertain between top topic assignments for at least the 
comments most representative of those top topics, 25 such comments were chosen from the 
dataset for each. A comment’s representativeness of a topic 
is operationalized as the 
1
It is possible that for a significant portion of the dataset, similar probabilities were associated with several topics 
and by choosing only the most likely topic we lost information with significant impact on the trends. The choice of 
hyperparameters discourages this. However, to ensure the robustness of the trends, we used an alternative 
calculation where the contribution of a given topic is determined by the normalized sum of probabilities assigned to 
the words of a document conditioned on that topic and the document’s context. Using this method, any probability 
associated with a topic counts towards its overall contribution. The results did not deviate significantly from what is 
reported in the text. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
11 
percentage of words in the comment assigned to a top topic for which topic 
is the most 
probable topic. Top comments were on average 89% representative of their assigned top topic. 
We informally inspected the sampled comments to confirm the theme represented by each topic. 
Examples of sampled comments and their associated representativeness value can be seen in 
Appendix C. 
We then applied the criteria discussed in Baron and Spranca (1997) to categorize each 
theme as consequentialist or values-based. They argue that values are framed as deontological 
rules for action and are characterized by resistance to trade-offs and insensitivity to quantity. 
Intentions of agents are important in characterizing events based on values, and they may be 
associated with moral arguments and detached from certain significant concrete outcomes. 
Results 
Breakdown of discourse. Ten topics passed the three percent average monthly 
contribution threshold. One topic was discarded because the unique and almost unique high 
probability words, and the most representative comments associated with it, revealed the main 
focus to be legalization of marijuana as a follow-up to same-sex marriage. Inspection of the 
remaining topics revealed the following themes (see Appendix C): religious arguments, freedom 
of belief, forcing vs. allowing behavior, name-calling, same-sex marriage as a political issue, 
politicians’ stance on same-sex marriage, slippery slope argument, personal anecdotes and 
familial relationships. Figure 2 shows a word-topic matrix from the trained model for some of 
the unique high probability words associated with each topic. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
12 
Figure 2. A word-topic probability matrix from the trained model showing some of the high probability words for values-based 
(top panel) and non-values-based (bottom panel) topics. The color scale shows the probability of each word (the vertical axis) 
under each top topic (the horizontal axis). The generally higher probability values on the diagonals highlight that these words 
are distinctly indicative of a specific top topic. 
Religious arguments, freedom of belief and forcing vs. allowing behaviors were 
categorized as values-based, as they reflect deeply-held beliefs grounded in religion or principles 
of individual freedom that are resistant to material trade-offs. Name-calling generally involved 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
13 
pejorative comments directed towards actions and was therefore also characterized as values-
based. 
Although norm-based judgments may be invoked while discussing politicians’ stance on 
same-sex marriage, the focus was mainly on the chain of consequences that these stances have in 
society. We therefore categorized this topic as consequentialist. Similarly, slippery slope 
arguments may rely on certain assumptions about values, but they often focus on causal chains 
of concrete events that can be confirmed or contradicted based on observed consequences. Our 
main results hold if this topic is characterized as values-based. 
We categorized familial relationships as neutral, because it was invoked as grounds for 
both consequentialist (e.g. children of same-sex parents turning out fine) and values-based 
arguments (e.g. sanctity of the traditional definition of marriage). Personal anecdotes could 
similarly be used to make a point about one’s protected values or to simply relate personal 
experiences (e.g. coming out stories). Therefore, this topic was categorized as neutral as well. 
The focus when framing same-sex marriage as a political issue was either the alignment of a 
certain party with one’s values, or alternatively to highlight lack of moral significance and to call 
for unity across party lines. Consequently, we decided to characterize this topic as neutral. Our 
main results hold if it is considered either consequentialist or values-based. 
Intertemporal Trends. We first combined monthly contribution estimates within the 
three topic categories: consequentialist, values-based, and neutral. We then used these pooled 
estimates in combination with timesteps to predict the monthly contribution of the top topics to 
the LDA model. The trends associated with each top topic were then examined independently 
using local polynomial regression with timestep as the only predictor. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
14 
While the LDA was trained on the entire dataset, monthly contributions from 2006 and 
2007 were deemed unreliable and excluded from the regression analysis because each estimate 
was based on less than 100 documents. All topics showed a significant temporal trend. 
Figure 3 shows the results of local polynomial regressions using timestep as predictor and 
monthly topic contributions summed across the relevant discourse category’s topics as the 
predicted variable. The shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals. 
Figure 3. Points reflect percentage monthly contribution of consequence-based, neutral and values-based topics to the trained 
LDA model, separated by color. Each data point is calculated by summing the monthly contribution of all topics subsumed by the 
relevant discourse category. The colored lines show the best-fitting local polynomial function. The shaded areas represent 95% 
confidence intervals. The vertical line to the left marks the beginning of a steady upward trend of support for same-sex marriage 
among a majority of Americans (Gallup, 2017). The vertical line to the right marks the Supreme Court ruling that legalized 
same-sex marriage. 
Our main result is that values-based themes rise in prominence until around 2013, after 
which they show a steady decline that predates the Supreme Court ruling in June 2015. The 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
15 
decline begins not long after the start of an increasing trend of support for same-sex marriage 
among a majority of Americans, followed by a number of prominent politicians coming out in 
favor of it (Gallup, 2017)
1
. Consequence-based topics, on the other hand, remain relatively stable 
as contributors to the discourse. Neutral topics steadily rise in prominence, driven in large part 
by more posts regarding personal experiences and familial relationships (see figure 6). 
To see if these trends are significant, a QR linear regression was performed using the 
same predictors, but logarithmic odds of topic contribution for each topic as the dependent 
variable. The model accounted for 92 percent of the variance in contribution (see Appendix B for 
the full results). Both values-based and neutral topics were associated with significantly higher 
contribution than consequence-based topics (both p < 0.001). The QR regression used individual 
topic contributions as predicted values, rather than estimations pooled across a group of topics, 
as in Figure 3. Therefore, the higher contribution of both values-based and neutral groups to the 
model is not because they are composed of more topics: Individual values-based and neutral 
topics are associated with higher average contribution. The convergent results also suggest that 
one or a few topics with much larger changes over time are not having an outsized impact on the 
QR regression parameter estimates. 
The slope associated with consequence-based topics did not deviate significantly from 
zero (p = 0.4). To evaluate the temporal trend of values-based topics, we examined the 
interaction of timesteps with the contribution of the values-based group. It was significantly 
lower than the slope for consequentialist topics (p < 0.01), while the interaction of timesteps with 
neutral characterization was significantly higher (p < 0.001). These results support the 
conclusion that values-based topics have been decreasing in contribution, while neutral topics 
1
Gallup first reported that more than 50% of Americans support same-sex marriage in May 2011 (Gallup, 2017). 
However, the percentage dropped from 53% to 48% in November of the same year (with a 95% confidence interval 
of 4%). Starting in May 2012, all polls showed steadily increasing mean approval rate of 50% or more. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
16 
have been on the rise in more recent years and consequence-based topics show no significant 
change in average contribution. 
Figure 4 shows the results of local polynomial regression for values-based topics. 
Forcing vs. allowing behaviors had the highest average contribution of any topic and shows the 
clearest downward trend, with no clear impact of either majority support for same-sex marriage 
or the Supreme Court ruling. Religious arguments and freedom of belief follow each other 
closely: They rise in prominence prior to 2013 and see a decrease in importance afterwards. The 
contribution of the name-calling topic has a similar trajectory at the beginning, but remains 
relatively constant after 2013. 
Figure 4. Points reflect percentage monthly contribution of individual values-based topics to the trained LDA model, separated 
by color. The colored lines show the best-fitting local polynomial function. The shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals. 
The black vertical line to the left marks the beginning of a steady upward trend of support for same-sex marriage among a 
majority of Americans (Gallup, 2017). The vertical line to the right marks the Supreme Court ruling that legalized same-sex 
marriage. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
17 
Figure 5 shows the results of local polynomial regression for consequence-based topics. 
The contribution of politicians’ stances to discourse about same-sex marriage stays relatively 
constant prior to 2011 and increases sharply for a period of two years afterwards. We conjecture 
that this increase is related to the fact that around the same time many politicians started to voice 
their support publicly, including Barack Obama. The second increase in discussions of 
politicians’ stances starts in 2014 and might initially relate to a string of highly publicized court 
cases regarding LGBT rights that culminated in the Supreme Court decision. The prominence of 
LGBT issues in presidential campaigns of 2016 might explain the higher probability of 
discussion about politicians’ stances in 2016. The contribution of this topic decreases in 2017, 
but is still higher on average than in 2015. The slippery slope argument, on the other hand, 
enjoys an increase in contribution prior to 2010, declining past that point. This slow decline 
could reflect decreased perceived plausibility of the suggested causal links in light of changes 
brought about by prior legislation or alternatively a change in values that govern attitudes 
towards the predicted outcomes. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
18 
Figure 5. Points reflect percentage monthly contribution of individual consequence-based topics to the trained LDA model, 
separated by color. The colored lines show the best-fitting local polynomial function. The shaded areas represent 95% 
confidence intervals. The black vertical line to the left marks the beginning of a steady upward trend of support for same-sex 
marriage among Americans since the first time a Gallup poll showed a majority of Americans are in favor of it (Gallup, 2017). 
The vertical line to the right marks the Supreme Court ruling that legalized same-sex marriage. 
Figure 6 shows the results of local polynomial regression for neutral topics. Familial 
relationships and personal anecdotes show similar trends over time, their contribution increasing 
rapidly in earlier years and more slowly afterwards. The former topic contributes more to the 
model but also shows greater month-to-month variability. The contribution of political framing 
stays relatively stable over time. A spike in 2016 that is not strongly reflected in the regression 
line occurred around the presidential elections. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
19 
Figure 6. Points reflect percentage monthly contribution of individual neutral topics to the trained LDA model, separated by 
color. The colored lines show the best-fitting local polynomial function. The shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals. 
The black vertical line to the left marks the beginning of a steady upward trend of support for same-sex marriage among a 
majority of Americans (Gallup, 2017). The vertical line to the right marks the Supreme Court ruling that legalized same-sex 
marriage. 
Limitations. As with any statistical analysis, meaningful results from an LDA analysis 
are by no means guaranteed. We reflect briefly on some of the factors that could have impacted 
our results and conclusions. 
Number of topics. The distributions representative of top topics partly reflect parameter 
choices, such as the number of topics. For instance, the output for 75 topics included a top topic 
uniquely associated with the Supreme Court ruling. No such topic emerged from the 
optimization algorithm with fewer topics. We also note that, due to either the strictness of the 
threshold that determined significant contribution or the nature of discourse on Reddit, our 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
20 
analysis excludes some topics relevant to the debate over same-sex marriage (e.g. systemic 
discrimination or the consequences of international laws relevant to LGBT rights). 
Data. The quality of an algorithm’s outputs is largely a function of its inputs. Most of the 
posts in our dataset belong to more recent years. Therefore, the trained model reflects more 
strongly the statistical properties of discourse in those years. Relatedly, Reddit posts appear to be 
biased towards pro-same-sex marriage opinions. According to ratings by the authors, the rate of 
positive attitudes among the most representative posts we sampled for the top ten topics was 
higher than the reported national average (Gallup, 2017). 
LDA. More generally, LDA is designed to find likely hierarchical relationships between 
units of discrete data under certain distributional assumptions. Its ability to pick up interpretable 
themes in documents emerges from the correspondence of interpretability with statistical 
properties of the “bag-of-words” representations of these documents. Such representations lose 
important aspects of language, including sequential dependencies between words. We urge 
readers to follow the advice of Blei et al. (2003) and treat the epistemological claims we make 
about the top topics with the usual degree of caution.
1
Discussion 
We hypothesized that shifts in public attitudes surrounding same-sex marriage are 
accompanied by shifts in public discourse away from protected values and towards 
consequentialist rhetoric, and that this shift would be reflected in discourse on Reddit over the 
last decade. To address the question, we used LDA to infer the topics underlying the messages 
appearing on Reddit from the year 2006 to September 2017, and examined the contribution of 
each topic to the corpus over time. Many of the trends we observed coincided with political 
1
To quote Blei et. al. 2003, “[w]e refer to the latent multinomial variables in the LDA model as topics, so as to 
exploit text-oriented intuitions, but we make no epistemological claims regarding these latent variables beyond their 
utility in representing probability distributions on sets of words.” 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
21 
turning points associated with the same-sex debate, suggesting discourse on Reddit can track 
political shifts on issues of major social interest. 
Our results show that on average the contribution of consequentialist topics (e.g. the 
impact of politicians’ stances) has remained stable over the past decade, while neutral topics that 
are neither consequentialist nor values-based have become more frequent (for instance, sharing 
of personal LGBT-themed anecdotes). In contrast, the contribution of values-based topics 
increased prior to a rise in public support for same-sex marriage among a majority of Americans 
(Gallup, 2017), and declined afterwards. Taken together, these trends suggest progressively less 
values-based framing of the issue after mid-2012. 
Our results are correlational, and do not speak to the causal relation between changes in 
discourse and changes in attitudes. They show only that for this one social issue, a shift along the 
dimension of values-based discourse coincides with a shift in public attitude. 
Shifts in temporal trends for values-based topics coincided with the development of 
majority support for same-sex marriage. This could have occurred for several reasons. 
Individuals might have voiced their support for values they believe are popular. As opinions 
shift, the tendency to provide arguments for the less popular viewpoints could decrease. 
Alternatively, people may be more likely to rely on their communities to determine their values 
than to determine consequentialist beliefs or anecdotes (Sloman & Fernbach, 2017). There is 
strong evidence that people do not reason their way to many of their beliefs, but instead inherit 
those beliefs from the groups they affiliate with (including their families, religious and political 
communities, etc.; for an early modern discussion see Hardwig, 1985). People often find 
protected values hard to justify (Haidt, 2001), making them prime contenders to be selected by 
perceived social acceptability. In contrast, personal anecdotes depend on knowledge that doesn’t 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
22 
reside in the broader community. Consequence-based arguments are more compelling when 
accompanied by individual causal knowledge and in that sense less likely to be outsourced to the 
community. From this perspective, a decline in polarization could reflect individuals’ increasing 
reliance and reflection on their own understandings of the consequences of allowing or 
prohibiting same-sex marriage. 
The data we report suggest that the trajectory of discourse on this important social issue 
began with a debate about protected values: Should the issue be framed in terms of a protected 
notion of marriage as holding only between a man and a woman or should the issue be framed in 
terms of the protected right to marry whoever one wants to? Once attitudes began to change, the 
discourse changed too. Even though values remained major contributors to the discourse, the 
debate shifted to be less values-oriented, and the relative concentration of consequentialist 
discourse increased. 
So far, we have discussed values-based and consequence-based framing of the discourse 
as if they are mutually exclusive. It is possible that protected values and consequentialist 
thinking fall on separate discursive dimensions rather than on the same continuum (cf. Tanner, 
Medin & Iliev, 2008). Relatedly, some of the themes we discovered in our dataset can be used to 
appeal to both or neither of these dimensions. Without assuming a strict continuum between the 
two, we maintain that protected values and consequentialism characterize two central frames of 
public discourse. 
We have tracked intertemporal trends in high-level themes, but our method does not have 
the resolution to allow us to delve into the fine-grained ways in which these themes are invoked. 
For example, while we can track discussion of the slippery slope argument over time, we’re 
unable to say how often it is invoked sincerely and how often as a straw man. The different ways 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
23 
in which discussants invoke protected values and consequences could explain or predict different 
patterns of attitude shifts. For example, Atran, Axelrod and Davis (2007) argue that 
acknowledging and making small concessions to the other side’s protected values is an important 
and often necessary step in conflict resolution and the achievement of consensus. Brewer (2003) 
provides evidence of changes in values accompanying more positive attitudes towards the LGBT 
community. A natural follow-up to our work would be to track to what extent shifts in values-
based and consequentialist rhetoric trace other dimensions of political discourse. 
Public discourse is a rugged and complex landscape. We have presented a survey of 
specific dimensions in that landscape which we argue can be helpful for characterizing societal 
discourse, with the hope of contributing to an ongoing project of mapping its features more 
entirely. 
Acknowledgments 
This article greatly benefited from discussion with members of Sloman Lab at Brown 
University. We thank An Vo and Luana Pessanha de Mattos for their help with data gathering.
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
24 
References 
Atran, S., Axelrod, R., & Davis, R. (2007). Sacred barriers to conflict resolution. Science, 317, 
1039-1040. 
Baron, J., & Leshner, S. (2000). How serious are expressions of protected values?. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 6(3), 183-194. 
Baron, J., & Spranca, M. (1997). Protected values. Organizational behavior and human decision 
processes, 70(1), 1-16. 
Bird, S., Loper. E, & Klein, E. (2009). Natural Language Processing with Python. O’Reilly 
Media Inc. 
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I., (2003). Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Machine 
Learning Research, 3, 993-1022. 
Brewer, P. R. (2003), The Shifting Foundations of Public Opinion about Gay Rights. Journal of 
Politics, 65, 1208-1220. doi:10.1111/1468-2508.t01-1-00133. 
Chang, J., Boyd-Graber, J., Gerrish, S., Wang, C. & Blei, D., (2009). Reading tea leaves: How 
humans interpret topic models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 21 
(pp. 288-296). Proceedings of Neural Information Processing Systems 2009. 
Cohen Priva, U., & Austerweil, J. L. (2015). Analyzing the history of Cognition using topic 
models. Cognition, 135, 4-9. 
Dehghani, M., Iliev, R., Sachdeva, S., Atran, S., Ginges, J., & Medin, D. (2009). Emerging 
sacred values: Iran's nuclear program. Judgment and Decision Making, 4(7), 930-933. 
Fellbaum, C. (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Fernbach, P. M., Min, L., & Sloman, S. A. (2018). Values-based and consequence-based policy 
attitudes. Working paper. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
25 
Fernbach, P. M., Rogers, T., Fox, C., & Sloman, S. A., (2013). Political extremism is supported 
by an illusion of understanding. Psychological Science, 24, 939-946. 
Gallup. (2017). US Support for Gay Marriage Edges to New High. Retrieved from 
http://news.gallup.com/poll/210566/support-gay-marriage-edges-new-high.aspx 
Griffiths, T. L., Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Topics in semantic representation. 
Psychological review, 114(2), 211. 
Haidt, J. (1995). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach to moral 
judgment. Psychological Review, 108, 814–834. 
Hardwig, J. (1985). Epistemic dependence. Journal of Philosophy, 82(7), 335–349. 
Hoffman, M., Bach, F. R., & Blei, D. M. (2010). Online learning for latent dirichlet allocation. In 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 856-864). Proceedings of 
Neural Information Processing Systems 2010. 
Kant, I. (1797). The metaphysics of morals. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Lakoff, G. (2004). Don't think of an elephant!: Know your values and frame the debate. Chelsea 
Green Publishing. 
Mimno, D., Wallach, H. M., Talley, E., Leenders, M., & McCallum, A. (2011). Optimizing 
semantic coherence in topic models. In Proceedings of the conference on empirical 
methods in natural language processing (pp. 262-272). Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Pew Research Center (2017). Changing Attitudes on Gay Marriage. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewforum.org/fact-sheet/changing-attitudes-on-gay-marriage/. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
26 
Řehůřek, R. & Sojka, P., (2010). Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. 
In Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks, 
(pp. 45-50). Website: http://is.muni.cz/publication/884893/en. 
Rozenblit, L., & Keil, F. (2002). The misunderstood limits of folk science: An illusion of 
explanatory depth. Cognitive science, 26(5), 521-562. 
Sloman, S., & Fernbach, P. (2017). The Knowledge Illusion: Why We Never Think Alone. 
Riverhead Books. 
Tan, C., Niculae, V., Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., & Lee, L. (2016). Winning arguments: 
Interaction dynamics and persuasion strategies in good-faith online discussions. In 
Proceedings of the 25th international conference on world wide web (pp. 613-624). 
International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee. 
Tanner, C., Medin, D. L., & Iliev, R. (2008). Influence of deontological versus consequentialist 
orientations on act choices and framing effects: When principles are more important than 
consequences. European Journal of Social Psychology, 38(5), 757-769. 
Tetlock, P. E. (2003). Thinking the unthinkable: Sacred values and taboo cognitions. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 7(7), 320-324. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
27 
Appendix A 
Corpus Pre-processing 
Regular expression used to select relevant comments 
In creating the Regular expression, WordNet synsets (Fellbaum, 1998) were used to 
determine words close in meaning to gay and marriage. Some of the terms include homophobic 
slurs, while some are not taboo. We then removed terms with obvious alternative meanings (such 
as “queen”) in order to reduce the amount of noise, resulting in the following regular expression: 
(^(?=.*gay|.*\\bfag|.*faggot|.*fagot|.*queer|.*\\bhomo|.*LGBT|.*GLBT|.*same.sex|.*lesb
ian|.*\\bdike|.*\\bdyke|.*sodom)(?=.*marry|.*civil union|.*marri).*$)|(^(?=.*marriage 
equality|.*equal marriage).*$) 
Set of words retained from Natural Language Toolkit’s list of stopwords 
Potentially values-based. should, shouldn’t, should've, shan’t, need, needn’t, ought, 
must, mustn’t 
Potentially consequentialist. how, can, could, couldn’t, few, more, most, all, any, 
against, because, why 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
28 
Appendix B 
Procedures and Analysis Results 
Text Processing 
Words that appeared in less than five documents or more than 0.99 fraction of them were 
removed as extremely rare or ubiquitous. 
LDA model 
Parameters. Ninety-nine percent of the documents (randomly chosen) were used to train 
the model over 1000 iterations. The rest of the dataset was used as an evaluation set. The lower 
bound on per-term topic probability was set to 0.01. 
Measures of predictiveness. The lower bound on per-word perplexity of the trained 
model was 178 on the training set and 66 on one percent of held-out documents, providing no 
evidence of overfitting. Chang and colleagues (2009) have argued that perplexity measures often 
do not align with humans’ typical semantic space. We therefore also calculated the UMass 
coherence measure for topics, quantifying how much on average a common word in a topic is a 
good predictor for a less common word (Mimno, Wallach, Talley, Leenders & McCallum, 2011). 
Logarithm of this coherence measure was -3.63 for the trained model. 
Robustness of topic contribution calculation. To test for the robustness of the 
distribution of topic contributions to random initializations of estimated parameters
1
, we ran the 
topic contribution calculation ten times and calculated the Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD)
2
between the resulting distributions. The pairwise JSD between the distributions from all runs was 
effectively 0. 
1
The gensim package’s (Řehůřek & Sojka, 2010) implementation of the algorithm to estimate topic-word 
distributions, which we used to estimate each term of the topic contributions (see section “Calculating topic 
contributions”), randomly initializes model parameters. 
2
We used the naïve calculation of JSD implemented by the THOTH Python package, available at thoth-python.org. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
29 
Full results of the QR linear regression. Consequence-based discourse is represented as 
the baseline. A colon represents an interaction. 
residuals. 
Min 
1
st
Quartile 
Median 
3
rd
Quartile 
Max 
-0.44863 
-0.11229 
-0.00009 
0.10966 
0.58549 
coefficients. 
Coefficients: 
Estimate 
SE 
t value 
P(>|t|) 
(Intercept) 
-1.3972790 
0.0409741 
-34.102 
< 2e-16 *** 
Discourse category neutral 
0.2305320 
0.0579461 
3.978 
8.46e-05 *** 
Discourse category values-based 1.6467336 
0.0579461 
28.418 
< 2e-16 *** 
Month 
0.0000100 
0.0004669 
0.021 
0.983 
Discourse category neutral:Month 0.0036237 
0.0006603 
5.488 
7.88e-08 *** 
Discourse category values:Month 
-0.0029267 
0.0006603 
-4.433 
1.25e-05 *** 
Significance codes: ‘***’ 0.001, ‘**’ 0.01, ‘*’ 0.05, ‘.’ 0.1, ‘ ’ 1 
other measures. 
Residual SE: 0.1706 on 345 df 
Multiple R-squared: 0.9238, Adjusted R-squared: 0.9227 
F-statistic: 836.6 on 5 and 345 df, p-value: < 2.2e-16 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
30 
Appendix C 
Unique or Almost Unique High Probability Words and Example Comments for Top Topics 
Unique high probability words are words among a topic’s list of 80 words with highest 
prior probability that were not found in similar lists for other top topics. Almost unique high 
probability words were shared with only a single other top topic. The words are ordered based on 
probability given the relevant topic. All words are coerced to lowercase, as in analysis. The two 
sets of high probability words are followed by an example post randomly chosen from the set of 
posts most representative of that topic. Representativeness in this appendix is operationalized as 
the percentage of words in the comment for which the associated top topic is the most probable 
topic. 
Values-based Topics 
Religious arguments. unique. god, bible, sin, islam, jesus, christianity, muslim, accept, 
faith, follow, christ, feel, book, part, telling 
almost unique. christian, religion, believe, homosexuality, anyone, live, church, others, 
belief, religious, hell, anything, understand, nothing 
example post (representativeness = 0.73). I understand that many people interpret the 
bible to say that God doesn't approve of gay sex, but when I interpret the bible or any other book 
that makes claims about what God does or doesn't like, I always ask myself what is the reason? If 
God tells us not to do something, he should have a very good reason for it, like don't murder, that 
makes sense because it harms people, so I can believe this command comes from God, no 
problem. But what could God possibly see wrong with two people of the same sex, who love 
each other, getting married? Who does this harm, you don't believe God gives us arbitrary rules 
do you? 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
31 
Freedom of belief. unique. opinion, choice, freedom, personal, atheist, respect, moral, 
disagree, hold, natural, example, teaching, try, simply, evolution, practice, science, trying, may, 
public, genuinely, however, idea 
almost unique. believe, belief, religious, religion, others, based, christian, homosexuality, 
personally, school, value, etc, fine 
example post (representativeness = 0.75). The bible never says to hate anyone. I lovingly 
disagree with a lot of things, but i hate nothing. The bible says to disagree with a lot of things but 
it never says to hate anyone. Do i disagree with same sex marriage? yes am i pro life? yes, but i 
will never spread hate about anyone who does get/believe in abortion or same sex marriage. as a 
Christian you're supposed to Spread the love of Jesus Christ, not hate. 
Name-calling. unique. shit, fuck, fucking, give, don’t, i’m, gonna, stupid, bullshit, 
honestly, as, that’s, asshole, idiot, lol, shitty, suck, hey, damn, seriously, shut, stuff, sad, keep, 
can’t, wanna, dick, bitch, dumb 
almost unique. dude, oh, hell, anything, day, stop, big 
example post (representativeness = 0.58). I say faggot all the time. I'm not going to stop 
saying it because a bunch of homosexuals I don't even know don't like it. I grew up saying it and 
much like Louis CK said it NEVER MEANT GAY. I support gay marriage, gay causes and gay 
equality and if it STILL makes me a horrible person to call some asshole a faggot then fuck you 
faggot, I bet I've given more money and time in my life to advance gay rights than any of you 
hater faggots. 
Forcing vs. Allowing Behaviors. unique. legally, nobody, wedding, whatever, whether, 
rid, affect, place, forced, maybe, wanting, force, anyway, totally, unless 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
32 
almost unique. allowed, couple, able, shouldn’t, fine, understand, anyone, couldn’t, stop, 
allow, happy 
example post (representativeness = 0.51). If these issues do not really affect you, then 
why do you care if it will make people happy. This may be a very naive way of thinking but if 
two gay people want to get married just let them or if someone wants to smoke cannabis why not 
just let them, it really doesn't change anything about you. On these two issues in particular I can 
not understand the conservative stance. Abortion I see where conservatives are coming from but 
I would be pro-choice. 
Consequence-based Topics 
Politicians’ stance on same-sex marriage. unique. support, obama, anti, supported, 
hillary, clinton, libertarian, changed, president, pro-gay, politically, equality, opposes, anti-gay, 
mind, considering, 90, campaign, pro-choice, bill, presidency, favor, rally, supporter, openly, 
pro, recently, cool, pro-life, stated, socialist, repealing, least, lied, fiscally, crowd 
almost unique. position, politician, first, came, progressive, change, personally, since, 
conservative 
example post (representativeness = 0.41). It's definitely not a non issue, the Republicans 
seem set on making opposition to gay rights a central plank of their campaign. I think his hand 
has probably been forced somewhat by Joe Biden coming out in support of gay marriage this 
week (which the cynic in me sees as his first bit of campaigning for a Biden presidency in 2016). 
I don't know how much this will actually benefit Obama's campaign though, because even 
without saying he supports gay marriage, he already likely had the pro gay vote tied up. It is a 
good way to reinvigorate the broader left on a hot button liberal issue though. 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
33 
Slippery Slope Argument. unique. argument, human, gender, discrimination, allowing, 
okay, race, logic, slope, slippery, animal, basic, sense, lead, deny, dog, valid, used, logical, 
treated, comparison, use, argue, treat, consent, somebody, discriminate, denied, letting, equally, 
sexual, line, exactly, orientation 
almost unique. marrying, based, able, allow, shouldn’t, polygamy, allowed 
example post (representativeness = 0.73). Let me preface this by saying I'm for gay 
rights and voted no on 8. I was just curious how someone would approach this argument: A 
friend of mine was arguing about two people in love being able to marry. He then went on to say, 
why shouldn't three people in love be able to marry each other or four and so on. I wasn't able to 
respond because I think that two consenting adults, regardless of sex, who are in love should be 
able to marry. I couldn't come up with a valid argument against polygamy. 
Neutral Topics 
Familial relationships. unique. woman, man, men, lesbian, wife, husband, male, female, 
bi, bisexual, another, sex, porn, find, sister, attracted, homo, daughter, brother, happily, boy, 
either, looking, closeted, divorced 
almost unique. girl, friend, dude, kid, relationship, marrying, mom, dad, ever, work, lot, 
partner, best 
example post (representativeness = 0.65). Yeah, I've noticed something similar to this. I 
haven't even been in a long-term relationship with a woman, and my situation is much different 
(I'm married to a man who allows me to enjoy being with women because he understands). I'm 
incredibly up front about this situation when I'm talking to women that I'm interested in 'getting 
to know further' and they always ask "why don't you just tell your husband you're a lesbian 
then?" I've gotten that from a couple women and am always slightly irritated by it. I have to keep 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
34 
saying "its not that I don't enjoy sex with my husband, its that he's not a woman, and I like those 
too." 
Personal Anecdotes. unique. year, told, family, went, together, started, back, later, 
knew, high, dating, met, parent, wanted, mother, catholic, found, boyfriend, talk, few, around, 
ended, donald, tried, night, home 
almost unique. friend, school, kid, came, day, best, relationship, girl, since, first, happy, 
mom, made, dad, long, couldn’t, partner, couple, church, live, ever, work 
example post (representativeness = 0.89). That's definitely true. I knew a girl in grade 
school whose father finally came out of the closet when we were in high school. It was great to 
hear her talk about how happy her parents were with their new boyfriends. Also, there was a 
pretty big movement back in the day, mostly led by the Church. They would connect gay and 
lesbian members of their flock so they could marry and live a "normal" life. Needless to say, 
these couples are *much* happier now that they are able to divorce and live their lives as 
themselves, rather than as something they're not. 
Same-sex Marriage as a Political Issue. unique. issue, social, political, policy, left, 
party, important, politics, climate, immigration, economic, major, far, side, country, wing, vote, 
foreign, real, focus, gop, voter, economy, european, drug, current, system, debate, candidate, 
penalty, voting, topic 
almost unique. etc, change, lot, conservative, position, value, progressive, politician, big 
example post (representativeness = 0.57). We're super divided. We have these "hot 
button issues" that are meant to keep us separate. You have to be on one extreme or the other. 
Most of these aren't even really meaningful issues, but are just there to divide us. Gay marriage? 
That's not a major issue. It's something to be resolved. It shouldn't be what divides us. Same with 
THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES 
35 
abortion, or GMOs, or whatever. They aren't really the major issues of our day. They're bullshit 
fed to us to keep us divided and fighting. 
Discarded Topic 
Marijuana legalization. unique. legal, cake, weed, legalization, marijuana, already, 
cause, picture, yet, legalize, realize, progress, homophobia, making, chick, evangelicals, 
difference, distinction, destroyed, per, usa, completely, data, criminal, legalized, correct, guess, 
cannabis, guessing, solved, probably, chicken, hot, proposal, fence, huge, building 
almost unique. polygamy, made, long, nothing, oh 
example post (representativeness = 0.40). There is a huge difference, though, between 
gay marriage and marijuana legalization. If marijuana were *legalized* (as opposed to just 
decriminalized), you'd have a huge number of tourists. There's money to be made. That's not true 
with gay marriage. Sure, there'd be a bump in the economy for weddings and related things - but 
people aren't going to travel to a state three times a year because marriage is legal there for 
everyone. There's no incentive for a neighboring state to recognize those marriages. They're not 
really losing money to their neighbors for keeping it illegal. Do you see what i mean? 
