Towards Semantic Query Segmentation
Ajinkya Kale, Thrivikrama Taula, Sanjika Hewavitharana, Amit Srivastava
eBay Inc., 2065 Hamilton Ave, San Jose, CA
{ajkale,ttaula,shewavitharana,amitsrivastava}@ebay.com
ABSTRACT
Query Segmentation is one of the critical components for under-
standing users’ search intent in Information Retrieval tasks. It in-
volves grouping tokens in the search query into meaningful phrases
which help downstream tasks like search relevance and query un-
derstanding.
In this paper,
we propose a novel approach to seg-
ment user queries using distributed query embeddings. Our key
contribution is a supervised approach to the segmentation task
using low-dimensional feature vectors for queries, getting rid of
traditional hand tuned and heuristic NLP features which are quite
expensive.
We benchmark on a 50,000 human-annotated web search engine
query corpus achieving comparable accuracy to state-of-the-art
techniques. The advantage of our technique is its fast and does not
use external knowledge-base like Wikipedia for score boosting. This
helps us generalize our approach to other domains like eCommerce
without any fine-tuning. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this
method on another 50,000 human-annotated eCommerce query
corpus from eBay search logs. Our approach is easy to implement
and generalizes well across different search domains proving the
power of low-dimensional embeddings in query segmentation task,
opening up a new direction of research for this problem.
KEYWORDS
Query Segmentation, Word Embeddings, eCommerce search, Neu-
ral Information Retrieval
1
INTRODUCTION
Query Segmentation involves the process of splitting the search
query into meaningful continuous segments to assist search pre-
cision and retrieval tasks. Search engines fetch high quality and
most relevant results when they are able to identify the important
phrases in the search query which need to be kept together for
quality results.
One way to achieve this is if the user is explicit
about the phrases by adding quotes around the segments of the
search query to indicate phrases. But this is hardly the pattern you
see in real world search logs.
Users expect the search engine to
infer and understand these phrases.
This ends up degrading the
precision in most cases where the phrase as a whole is important
to be kept together during retrieval like movie name,
song title,
brands etc. Consider a shopper looking for long sleeve summer dress.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR 2017 Workshop on Neural Information Retrieval (Neu-IR’17), , August 7–11, 2017,
Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 123-4567-24-567/08/06.
https://doi.org/10.475/123_4
She is looking for mainly summer dress which have long sleeves.
The underlying search engine needs to know that the query is for a
dress and specifically for summer wear which have long sleeve as an
additional feature of the dress. The search experience is different
if a user searches with quotes around the segments - "long sleeve"
"summer" "dress" compared to the unquoted query.
If the query
is treated as a bag of words,
the results might end up being less
precise.
In the long sleeve summer dress,
the results are far from
accurate if we show the user items which match long summer dress
with short sleeves. Order plays a vital role in query segmentation
which is lost in a bag of words model.
Rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews past
and recent work on query segmentation followed by the motiva-
tion for our novel approach for semantic query segmentation in
Section 3. Section 4 will describe our modeling architecture. Sec-
tion 5 will cover our experiments and results on AOL web query
corpus and on annotated eBay eCommerce query corpus. We pro-
vide an in-depth analysis and comparison of our techniques with
other query segmentation approaches. We close out in Section 6
by discussing the issues we faced with annotation and some future
research directions.
2
RELATED WORK
Over the years, there has been a lot of interest in query segmenta-
tion in the search engine space. Few of the initial query segmen-
tation work were based on computing mutual information on the
query terms. Risvik et al
.
[
16
] segments the query using connexity
values that use the mutual information within a segment along
with the segment’s frequency in the query logs. Huang et al
.
[
7
]
use segment based Pairwise Mutual Information (PMI) to build
a web-scale language model.
Among other mutual information
based techniques, Jones et al
.
[
8
] find query segments for effective
query substitution. There are several other techniques to find effec-
tive query segments based on Conditional Random Fields. Kiseleva
et al
.
[
9
] user users’ click data along with the query to segment
the queries in an unsupervised way.
Guo et al
.
[
4
] use CRF tech-
niques to segment the queries more as a query refinement task.
This task involves spelling correction, stemming etc. as tasks that
are solved in parallel to the query segment tasks which result in
effective query refinement. Most of the current query segmentation
techniques assume the queries to be corrected from a spell checker
and stemmed if required. Using word embeddings, we will show
that spelling corrections are handled implicitly while segmenting
the queries and the semantic model is immune to common spelling
mistakes.
Tan and Peng [
17
] and Zhang et al
.
[
18
] suggest unsupervised
methodologies to find quality query segments. Tan and Peng use
the raw query frequencies using the Wikipedia corpus to build a
language model via expectation maximization.
They then boost
the segmentation scores derived form this language model for a
arXiv:1707.07835v1 [cs.IR] 25 Jul 2017
query segment if its prominently featured in Wikipedia. Bergsma
and Wang [
1
] treated query segmentation as a supervised learning
tasks handcrafting few features like POS tag features,
statistical
features like query and phrase frequencies in web and query logs,
context dependent features focusing on noun phrases. The authors
also share 500 queries as a gold data set annotated by 3 human
judges. Many subsequent works have used this data set. 500 queries
is a rather small dataset for a web search query segmentation task
and its hard to prove the generalization power of the model on
it. Hagen et al
.
[
6
] introduce a 50K gold data set annotated by 10
human judges. We use this gold data set for benchmarking query
segmentation accuracies on web search queries. Hagen et al
.
[
5
]
introduce a query segmentation method using the raw n-gram
frequencies of the segments in the search query logs. They introduce
a scoring function which computes the weighted sum of frequencies
contained in the n-grams of a query. In their subsequent work [
6
]
they boost the segmentation scores for the phrases that appear
as Wikipedia titles on similar lines to Tan and Peng [
17
]. Parikh
et al
.
[
12
] used the same n-gram based scoring function [
5
] on eBay
eCommerce queries. They also introduce a few evaluation metrics
to measure the quality of the query segments from an eCommerce
point of view.
The scoring function using raw n-gram frequencies mentioned
in Hagen et al
.
[
6
] is an unsupervised approach which gives higher
weight to long segments compared to shorter ones in order to
compensate the power law distribution of occurrence frequencies.
Though this is true in most cases, it does not work well for variations
in word order for the same query. Bergsma and Wang [
1
] show that
supervised techniques work well for query segmentation task but
it requires handcrafting of features capturing the essence of the
underlying data set. The only work to the best of our knowledge
which talks about query segmentation in eCommerce setup is from
Parikh et al
.
[
12
]. They use the naive n-gram scoring function [
5
]
on eCommmerce queries.
3
MOTIVATION
Word embeddings techniques such as word2vec [
11
], Glove [
14
]
and fasttext [
2
] are used to capture low dimensional space repre-
sentation of words. These representations help to learn semantics
while they optimize for word context with their window-based
training style. The output probabilities predict how likely it is to
find each vocabulary word nearby the input word.
Our approach uses this context optimization to identify the best
possible segment boundaries in the query. Words in one segment n-
gram appear more often in queries in the same context compared to
words which do not belong to one segment. This helps to optimize
for higher similarity for words in potentially same segment versus
others in the vocabulary. Levy et al. demonstrate that word2vec
implicitly factorizes a word-context PMI matrix [
10
]. PMI is known
to be high for frequently co-occurring terms and low otherwise.
This is the primary motivation of our approach to utilize word2vec
style algorithms to learn query embeddings for segmentation.
4
CLASSIFIER ARCHITECTURE
In this section we describe query segmentation as a supervised
learning task using query embeddings as input features to the
eBay Query Logs
Query embeddings
Classifier
Training Data
Human-annotated 
Query Segments
Token 1
Token 2
Token 3
Token 4
User Query
Segment 1
Segment 2
Segment 3
Segmented Query
Offline 
Online 
Model
Figure 1: Query Segmentation architecture
classifier. For a query with
N
tokens, we will have
N-1
boundaries
between the tokens. We train a binary classifier to make these
N-1
segmentation decisions.
We demonstrate word embeddings model on two sets of query
logs: web search queries and eBay eCommerce queries. As shown in
Figure 1, after extracting queries from the query logs, we train the
query embeddings. Section 5 will go into details on the embeddings
learning parameters.
Consider a query
Q = W
1
W
2
W
3
W
4
... W
N
with
N
tokens. We
model the query segmentation task as an independent decision
making task to draw a segmentation break between the two words.
For every pair of words
W
i
, W
i+1
in a query we concatenate the
2 vectors (
D
dimension each) representing
W
i
and
W
i+1
into a
2D
vector. This concatenated vector is the input to the binary classifier
which decides to segment or not between W
i
and W
i+1
.
5
EXPERIMENTS
5.1
Performance Metrics
We segment the queries and measure the performance of our model
based on two metrics:
•
Segmentation Accuracy: Segmentation accuracy is the per-
cent of the correct decisions made - whether to apply seg-
mentation break or not for a combined set of segments in all
queries. Its global score for the entire query set.
•
Query Accuracy: Query accuracy is the percent of the cor-
rectly segmented queries.
This is a stricter metric as the
classifier has to achieve all the segments within a query to
get credit.
5.2
Experiments on web search query data
Bergsma and Wang [
1
] choose 1500 queries from 36M AOL query
set [
13
] and divide the data set into train, test, validation sets (500
each) to evaluate their segmentation techniques. As mentioned in
Hagen et al
.
[
5
] the data set is small to perform extensive compara-
tive analysis especially for web search queries which have a wide
domain distribution. For a much broader analysis of the segmenta-
tion algorithm effectiveness Hagen et al
.
[
6
] annotated 50K AOL
queries from the same 36M AOL corpus using 10 annotators. We
use this dataset to test our approach. Figure 3 shows a distribution
of annotator agreement for this corpus.
We do a 60-20-20 train-val-test split on the 50k queries. To train
the query embeddings, we remove the test set from the 36M AOL
queries. We use gensim [
15
] word2vec wrapper to build the model.
Since queries are short texts we use a smaller context window
(2-3). Our experiments show this smaller context window learns
better embeddings for queries especially for the segmentation task.
We set the dimension to 300,
which leads to a 600 dimensional
vector when we concatenate the 2 vectors. This 600 dimensional
vector becomes the input feature vector to the classifier. Once the
embeddings model is built, we build a classifier on the training set
and tune the parameters using validation set.
We tried multiple
classifiers but Logistic Regression and XGBoost [
3
] performed the
best. We found higher lift in the segmentation accuracy when we
use GBMs. We report these numbers in Table 1.
For benchmarking we build naive query segmentation model [
5
]
over the same data set. We can see that a simple logistic regression
on the embeddings vector gives better result than the raw ngram
frequency boosting technique (Table 1). We need to note that the
authors propose an improved model with boosting segments using
Wikipedia Titles [
6
], but we dont use it to keep the models agnostic
of external data augmentation. We plan to explore that as part of
our future work. Google’s word2vec [
11
] released pretrained word
embedding vectors on Google News. These pretrained embeddings
were built on data set which has about 100 Billion words. It has has
around 3 million words and phrases, each having 300 dimensional
vector.
We explore the idea of transfer learning to use these pretrained
embeddings (from news data corpus) for web query segmentation.
We follow a similar process as we did before when we trained a
embeddings model from scratch. These pretrained vectors act as
features for each word in a query, concatenate them and feed it to
the classifier. XGBoost was used as the classifier and we performed
a grid search to find the best hyper-parameters for depth of the
tree and number of estimators. This process was repeated with pre-
trained GloVe vectors on common crawl [
14
] and facebook fasttext
[
2
] pretrained model over Wikipedia corpus with 2.5M word vocab-
ulary. 2 shows the experiment results. We got the best performance
with Glove web crawl pretrained embeddings. These numbers are
reported in Table 2.
Table 1: Segmentation and Query accuracies on AOL queries
Method
Segmentation Accuracy
Query Accuracy
Naive n-gram
0.677
0.351
Logistic Regression
0.731
0.418
5.3
Experiments on eCommerce query data
We annotated a 50000 query set sampled across top 15k eBay cate-
gories over a period of 3 months. Each query received 3 annotations
each with meaningful segments keeping search relevance in mind.
For precision the annotators were asked to verify the segmented
query on eBay’s search engine to ensure quality of results improve
post segmentation. Figure 2 shows the annotator agreement dis-
tribution. We observed, 2 or more agree on around 77% of queries
Table 2:
Best accuracies using pretrained word embeddings using XGBoost
classifier (on AOL queries)
Word Vectors
Segmentation Accuracy
Query Accuracy
GloVe web crawl
0.811
0.552
GloVe web crawl average
0.781
0.497
Google News word2vec
0.797
0.523
Facebook Fasttext wikipedia
0.806
0.548
word2vec model on AOL corpus
0.804
0.54
whereas all 3 annotators are in agreement around 25% times. As
others have found out in the past experiments, query segmentation
has lot of ambiguity around it which reflects in the difference of
opinion in the annotations. A low percent on all 3 in agreement
highlights the fact that segmentation tasks can be very subjective.
Figure 2: eBay query annotation agreement
Figure 3: AOL web search query annotation agreement
For training we use the annotations where at least 2 out of 3
annotators are in agreement.
We divide this query set into 80-20% train and test split. The 80%
training data is further split into 80-20% train and validation set.
As shown in Figure 1 the query embeddings were learned using
fasttext followed by training an XGBoost [
3
] classifier for predicting
the segmentation breaks. A grid search for hyper parameter tuning
got us the best segmentation accuracy at 500 estimators and with
depth 4 on the XGBoost model with skip-gram and 800 estimators
with depth 6 for cbow embeddings. We experimented with both
cbow and skip-gram architectures for learning the query embed-
dings on eBay queries. The best numbers for both query accuracy
and segmentation accuracy were using cbow architecture. Figure
3 summarizes the accuracies for the naive ngram model and our
approach. The accuracy we obtain on the eCommerce data using
our technique clearly beats the naive ngram based segmentation
model. These numbers are also comparable with the embeddings
experiment which was ran on AOL queries.
Table 3: Segmentation and Query accuracies on eBay queries
Method
Segmentation Accuracy
Query Accuracy
Naive n-gram
0.713
0.578
Fasttext skip-gram + XGBoost
0.796
0.677
Fasttext cbow + XGBoost
0.799
0.683
6
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
In our study, we found eCommerce queries are harder for a crowd
sourcing annotation task because of the lack of product and domain
knowledge across all shopping categories which can be critical
for understanding the query intent before annotating. For example
consider the query "infant lebron". This query does not seem obvious
for the annotators to identify the query segment. Because, they need
to know that lebron is a brand of athletic shoes and infant is actually
the size description. We noticed a few annotators contesting such
queries asking for more clarity.
For queries like "toms men s size 12", the user is searching for
men’s but some annotators misinterpret it as (size) S and decide
to have a segmentation break between men and s but the model
predicts such scenarios right by keeping men and s together as a
single segment. There is lot of ambiguity what is a head object of
a query and what is not.
For example "food processor" or "coffee
grinder" clearly belong together as one segment, but it is debatable
if "motorcycle vest" or "golf pants" necessarily belong in one seg-
ment. One can argue motorcycle is just a constraint applied to buy
a particular type of vest and "motorcycle vest" together does not
necessarily represent the head shopping object. Aspects or modi-
fiers of a query are tricky and the ambiguity leads to a drop in the
classifier accuracy.
As pointed out by Hagen et al
.
[
6
], the quality and metrics used
for segmentation task heavily depend on the downstream task. A
deeper analysis of our downstream tasks is an area we intend to
explore in our future work. There has been some work on boosting
the segmentation score with Wikipedia entities and Wikipedia
titles, we plan to explore using structured data from eCommerce
dictionary like brands, colors, styles and other aspects to further
augment the training data for the embeddings. We also observed
the n-gram based approaches are very sensitive to word order in
the queries. For example "yeezy boost 350" is a product line offering
by adidas and the model keeps it together in one segment, but for
variation in the order like "boost 350 yeezy" (which is one of the
high frequency query we observed) the naive n-gram model fails to
keep it together and wrongly segments it as boost 350
|
yeezy but
our approach generalizes pretty well on word order. The context
based cost function in all the query embedding approaches we took
would explain that behavior.
7
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Matthias Hagen, Martin Potthast, Benno
Stein and Christof Brautigam, authors of Hagen et al
.
[
6
] for sharing
the 50K annotated web search query data set.
REFERENCES
[1]
Shane Bergsma and Qin Iris Wang. 2007.
Learning Noun Phrase Query Segmen-
tation.. In EMNLP-CoNLL, Vol. 7. 819–826.
[2]
Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. 2016.
En-
riching Word Vectors with Subword Information.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.04606
(2016).
[3]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. 2016.
Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system.
In Proceedings of the 22Nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 785–794.
[4]
Jiafeng Guo, Gu Xu, Hang Li, and Xueqi Cheng. 2008. A unified and discriminative
model for query refinement. In Proceedings of the 31st annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval.
ACM,
379–386.
[5]
Matthias Hagen, Martin Potthast, Benno Stein, and Christof Braeutigam. 2010.
The power of naive query segmentation. In Proceedings of the 33rd international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM,
797–798.
[6]
Matthias Hagen, Martin Potthast, Benno Stein, and Christof Bräutigam. 2011.
Query segmentation revisited. In Proceedings of the 20th international conference
on World wide web. ACM, 97–106.
[7]
Jian Huang, Jianfeng Gao, Jiangbo Miao, Xiaolong Li, Kuansan Wang, Fritz Behr,
and C Lee Giles. 2010.
Exploring web scale language models for search query
processing. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World wide web.
ACM, 451–460.
[8]
Rosie Jones, Benjamin Rey, Omid Madani, and Wiley Greiner. 2006.
Generating
query substitutions. In Proceedings of the 15th international conference on World
Wide Web. ACM, 387–396.
[9]
Julia Kiseleva,
Qi Guo,
Eugene Agichtein,
Daniel Billsus,
and Wei Chai.
2010.
Unsupervised query segmentation using click data: preliminary results. In Pro-
ceedings of the 19th international conference on World wide web. ACM, 1131–1132.
[10]
Omer Levy, Yoav Goldberg, and Ido Dagan.
Improving Distributional Similarity
with Lessons Learned from Word Embeddings. In Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, Vol. 3. 211–225.
[11]
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. 2013.
Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In
Advances in neural information processing systems. 3111–3119.
[12]
Nish Parikh, Prasad Sriram, and Mohammad Al Hasan. 2013.
On segmentation
of ecommerce queries. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference
on Conference on information & knowledge management. ACM, 1137–1146.
[13]
Greg Pass, Abdur Chowdhury, and Cayley Torgeson. 2006.
A picture of search..
In InfoScale, Vol. 152. 1.
[14]
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. 2014.
Glove:
Global Vectors for Word Representation.. In EMNLP, Vol. 14. 1532–1543.
[15]
Radim Řehůřek and Petr Sojka. 2010.
Software Framework for Topic Modelling
with Large Corpora. In Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges
for NLP Frameworks. ELRA, Valletta, Malta, 45–50.
http://is.muni.cz/publication/
884893/en.
[16]
Knut Magne Risvik, Tomasz Mikolajewski, and Peter Boros. 2003.
Query Seg-
mentation for Web Search.. In WWW (Posters).
[17]
Bin Tan and Fuchun Peng. 2008.
Unsupervised query segmentation using gen-
erative language models and wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 17th international
conference on World Wide Web. ACM, 347–356.
[18]
Chao Zhang, Nan Sun, Xia Hu, Tingzhu Huang, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2009.
Query
segmentation based on eigenspace similarity. In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP
2009 Conference Short Papers. Association for Computational Linguistics, 185–
188.
