Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014 
1 
Enhancing Literature Review Methods - 
Evaluation of a Literature Search Approach 
based on Latent Semantic Indexing 
Completed Research Paper 
André Koukal 
Leibniz Universität Hannover 
Königsworther Platz 1, 
30167 Hannover, Germany 
koukal@iwi.uni-hannover.de 
Christoph Gleue 
Leibniz Universität Hannover 
Königsworther Platz 1, 
30167 Hannover, Germany 
gleue@iwi.uni-hannover.de 
Michael H. Breitner 
Leibniz Universität Hannover 
Königsworther Platz 1, 
30167 Hannover, Germany 
breitner@iwi.uni-hannover.de 
Abstract 
Literature search, as a fundamental and time-consuming step in a literature research 
process, is part of many established scientific research methods. The facilitated access to 
scientific resources requires an increasing effort to conduct comprehensive literature 
reviews. We address the lack of semantic approaches in this context by proposing and 
evaluating our Tool for Semantic Indexing and Similarity Queries (TSISQ) for the 
enhancement of established literature review methods. Its applicability is evaluated in 
different environments and search cases covering realistic applications. Results indicate 
that TSISQ can increase efficiency by saving valuable time in finding relevant literature 
in a desired research field, improve the quality of search results, and enhance the 
comprehensiveness of a review by identifying sources that otherwise would not have 
been considered. The target audience includes all researchers who need to efficiently 
gain an overview of a specific research field and refine the theoretical foundations of 
their research. 
Keywords: 
Literature 
review, 
literature 
search, 
latent 
semantic 
indexing 
(LSI), 
information retrieval, similarity search 
Research Methods 
2 
Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014 
Introduction 
Literature research is a complex and highly important task (Wolfswinkel et al. 2013). As it sets the basis 
for 
every 
research 
project, 
the 
literature 
research 
process 
represents 
an 
“essential 
first 
step 
and 
foundation when undertaking a research project” (Baker 2000), independent from the research domain 
and the research method that is intended to be followed. Before attempting to contribute to any research 
field, it is crucial to be aware of what is already known in the respective scientific discipline’s body of 
knowledge (Hart 1998; Levy and Ellis 2006). Webster and Watson (2002) observed that specifically in the 
relatively young field of IS research, there is a lack of a proper theoretical foundation for quality literature 
reviews. They also state that, in order to strengthen IS as a field of study, effective literature review 
methods may provide great value to that discipline and furthermore, that well-founded and rigorously 
conducted literature reviews have a higher chance of getting published. Moreover, taking into account the 
constant increase in the number of scientific publications worldwide, as well as facilitated access to broad 
scientific resources triggered by new technologies (Mabe and Amin 2001; Park and Lee 2011) and the 
resulting complex information environment (Bawden and Robinson 2009; Manwani et al. 2001), an 
extensive literature review, conducted manually, is a more and more time-consuming task. 
Despite their usefulness as compared to a completely manual analysis of a large scientific database, 
keyword-based approaches have their shortcomings (Blair and Maron 1985; Homayouni et al. 2004; 
LaBrie and St. Louis 2003) and thus, “[…] are far from ideal” (Dumais et al. 1988). Ambiguity, synonymy, 
polysemy, the inappropriate use of “stop-words” like “and”, “is”, “it” or slashes, plurals and parentheses 
and, ultimately, the indexers’ inconsistency when applying subject terms can distort the search results. 
Hence, keyword searches are likely to cause false-positive or false-negative errors, i.e. potential matches 
may be missed or mismatches incorporated into the search results (Blair and Maron 1985; Dumais et al. 
1988; Hofmann 1999; LaBrie and St. Louis 2003; Salton and McGill 1986; Yandell and Majoros 2002). 
In spite of the above-mentioned limitations of this retrieval approach, most existing search engines still 
rely on term-matching methods only (Cui et al. 2003). Accordingly, we observed that search mechanisms 
of most of the established repositories for research papers and journal articles relevant to the information 
systems academic community today, e.g. AISeL, IEEE, JStor, ScienceDirect, Wiley, also seem to be 
keyword-based. Subsequently, overcoming the aforementioned deficiencies of keyword-based searches is 
an important challenge in IS research and research in general. To address this set of problems, we aim to 
evaluate an alternative, more sophisticated approach to finding similarities between texts that fulfills the 
following requirements: (1) Reliable identification of scientific papers that belong to a specific field of 
research 
(containing 
keywords 
from 
the 
initial 
query). 
(2) 
Identification 
of 
semantically 
similar 
publications from the same (or even different) field of research (containing synonyms or related terms to 
the keywords given in the initial query). (3) Overcoming the synonymy/polysemy problem and thus, 
avoiding false-positive and false-negative errors to a certain extent. (4) Support of informal formulation of 
search queries, i.e. from keywords, complete sentences, abstracts and entire research papers. 
Promising assessments from a number of authors (Corley et al. 2005; Kontostathis and Pottenger 2006; 
Kuechler 2007; Řehůřek and Sojka 2010; Zhang et al. 2011) indicate that latent semantic indexing (LSI) 
might provide a solution to the aforementioned set of problems and is likely to outperform established 
lexical matching similarity methods. The appropriateness and applicability of LSI to a wide variety of 
learning tasks has been proven already (Deerwester et al. 1990; Dumais et al. 1988; Gordon and Dumais 
1998; Kontostathis and Pottenger 2002; Zelikovitz and Hirsh 2001) but it has not yet been applied to our 
area of interest. We argue that following a semantic approach is likely to increase efficiency and thus, 
helps to save valuable time in identifying the most important literature in a designated research field 
while potentially avoiding the recent challenge of the proliferation of terms describing similar concepts in 
IS research (Lebek et al. 2013). Accordingly, the objective of this paper is to introduce and discuss an 
alternative approach to the individual researchers’ literature research process using LSI and evaluating its 
applicability to the detection of similarities between texts in a large database of scientific publications. 
The core of our research is the “Tool for Semantic Indexing and Similarity Queries” (TSISQ). It is 
designed to use unstructured texts, e.g. either complete scientific research papers or any kind of natural 
language, as query input and is able to identify semantically similar texts in a large index of scientific 
publications. We posit that TSISQ represents a useful addition to several 
steps of well-established 
literature review methods (Okoli and Schabram 2010; Levy and Ellis 2006; Webster and Watson 2002) as 
Evaluation of a LSI based Literature Search Approach 
Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014 
3 
it can help overcome the limitations of “classic” keyword searches mentioned above while enhancing and 
facilitating the research process. Furthermore, TSISQ is designed to be used to support every method that 
implicitly demands an extensive literature review, such as design science research according to Hevner 
with his claim for research rigor (Hevner et al. 2004) or the rigor cycle (Hevner 2007). The prototype of 
our tool will be used to evaluate the capabilities of LSI in this context. Hence, we seek to answer the 
following research question: 
RQ: “How can a LSI-based approach increase the efficiency of scientific literature research processes?” 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: After highlighting the motivation and relevance of 
the 
topic 
and 
pointing 
out 
the 
contributions 
and 
research 
objective, 
the 
theoretical background 
is 
presented together with an overview of related work. Next, the research design of this paper is explained 
in detail. Then, the theoretical concepts of LSI and its mode of operation are described, followed by an 
illustration of the architecture and implementation of TSISQ. Next, the tool’s performance is evaluated 
within a case study with three search cases and an experimental test case with an index of a controllable 
size. 
This 
is 
followed 
by 
a 
critical 
discussion, 
limitations, 
as 
well 
as 
theoretical 
and 
practical 
recommendations. Finally, a short conclusion is given and implications for further research are drawn. 
Research Background 
Theoretical Background and Related Work 
Literature reviews are the most basic, yet very important concept to set a theoretical basis. Their quality 
and usefulness greatly depends on the literature research process (vom Brocke et al. 2009). In the IS 
community, various well-established methods for properly conducting a quality literature review exist. 
Although the respective authors propose different sets of guidelines, it appears to be common sense that it 
is of particular importance to get (and thus provide) a broad understanding of the pursued research topic. 
Accordingly, the identification of relevant related literature is an important subtask in every literature 
review (Wolfswinkel et al. 2013). Amongst others, Webster and Watson (2002) claim that, in order to 
write an ideal article, relevant prior literature in IS and related areas has to be reviewed, which means an 
examination of past research is required. Levy and Ellis (2006) propose a systematic data-processing 
approach consisting of a three-stage framework. The first stage already includes the gathering and 
screening of “inputs”, i.e. the identification and analysis of quality literature in the respective field in order 
to ensure the validity and reliability of the study and its results. Okoli and Schabram (2010) point out that 
a literature review has to be systematic in terms of following a specific method and, more importantly in 
our case, comprehensive in its scope, including all relevant material (see also Fink 2010; Rousseau et al. 
2008). The need for comprehensiveness is again underlined in step three, “searching for the literature,” in 
the presented “eight-step-guide to conducting a [scientifically rigorous] systematic literature review.” 
Taking into consideration the above-mentioned guidelines and proposals, our aim is not to introduce an 
entirely new method for literature reviews, but to facilitate certain steps of the existing, well-established 
ones by proposing a tool-supported similarity search process. In order to narrow down the scope of this 
study, it is necessary to provide a brief overview of the considered retrieval approaches to address our 
underlying challenge of identifying semantic similarities between texts. 
Query 
expansion 
(QE) 
is 
an 
information 
retrieval 
(IR) 
technique 
that 
aims 
to 
advance 
retrieval 
effectiveness and improves the results of a keyword-based query by extending the provided search terms 
by synonyms or related terms. It addresses some fundamental deficiencies of keyword queries, such as 
word mismatch and synonymy (Cui et al. 2003; Liu et al. 2011; Mitra et al. 1998; Qiu and Frei 1993; Xu 
and Croft 1996). In other words, people who provide information often use different words to describe a 
concept than the people who search for it. Generally, QE increases the number of relevant results by 
adding more search terms to the original query (Liu et al. 2011; Mitra et al. 1998; Santos and Riveiro 2011; 
Xu and Croft 1996). Though this type of retrieval method might help researchers find more relevant 
documents for a query consisting of very few search terms, it will not perform well if complete research 
papers are used as query input. We argue that it is not suitable for the underlying problem of this study 
since the aim of our retrieval activity is not only to increase the quantity, but also and especially the 
quality of the search results. While the problem of synonymy may be diluted by applying QE to a keyword-
based 
query, 
the 
problem 
of 
polysemy 
(ambiguity 
of 
a 
term) 
remains 
unsolved 
(Liu 
et 
al. 
2011). 
Research Methods 
16 
Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014 
Conclusion and Further Research 
In this paper, a tool-supported approach to enhancing and advancing the scientific literature research 
process as an essential component of existing literature review methods is presented and evaluated. The 
complex and highly important subtask of literature search as a fundamental step of every literature 
research process is time-consuming and requires a lot of effort. The more comprehensively a literature 
search is conducted, the more likely it is that existing research gaps and questions are precisely addressed. 
This applies to methods in the field of IS research as well as in every other scientific discipline. 
With regard to our research question, we seek to provide an enhancement of established research 
methods by utilizing a theoretically well-founded, LSI-based approach. For this purpose, TSISQ, our Tool 
for Semantic Indexing and Similarity Queries, was implemented. It enables researchers to efficiently gain 
an overview of a specific research field, deepen their knowledge and furthermore, to refine the theoretical 
foundations of their research. We evaluate the applicability of TSISQ in a case study consisting of three 
different search cases and a laboratory experiment. The results are discussed, limitations are identified, 
and recommendations for its usage are drawn. Against the backdrop of the overall purpose of TSISQ to 
increase the efficiency of scientific literature research processes, it can be concluded that using our 
approach (a) can help save valuable time in finding the relevant literature in a desired research field and 
(b), if time is not a scarce factor, it can help increasing the comprehensiveness of a review by identifying 
sources that would otherwise not have been taken into account. Consequently, although human cognitive 
abilities are still indispensable, TSISQ is a useful complement to the established search engines used in 
the scientific literature research process and can increase its efficiency. 
Following the identified limitations, further research steps are required with regard to our approach. The 
database used for the index should be extended to cover more conferences and journals in a longer period 
of time. In order to improve the validity of evaluation results, future work should include more extensive 
and sophisticated tests and assessments of more domain experts. To enable statements about the accuracy 
of our tests, a statistical analysis that is widely used in the information retrieval domain could be 
employed. A calculation of the F-measure would not only consider the precision but also the recall of a 
test. The additional information about recall or sensitivity and thus, the fraction of relevant instances that 
are retrieved, could provide better insights about 
the general potential to use TSISQ for literature 
searches. A deeper analysis concerning the effects on the output, when query inputs for the same target 
domain are slightly adjusted, similar to a sensitivity analysis, could provide valuable insights as well. Such 
a controlled adjustment of individual search terms allows a composition of more aggregated and focused 
queries. 
Future 
work 
should 
also 
address 
the 
establishment 
of 
clear 
guidelines 
concerning 
the 
composition of query inputs. Measuring the effects on the search results for SEM in search case (c) when 
e.g. the terms “models”, “modeling”, and “modelling” are left out one at a time could help to provide such 
guidelines on how to formulate a query. Based on the previously mentioned steps and according to our 
recommendations, embedding the approach presented in this paper into a structured and well-designed 
iterative-process cycle can be a promising additional expansion. Finally, the system could be implemented 
as a web-based solution that serves links to scientific databases and thus, extends the service for 
researchers while leaving the full articles behind the scientific databases’ paywalls. 
References 
Abate, 
F., 
Ficarra, 
E., 
Acquaviva, 
and 
A., 
Macii, 
E. 
2013. 
“Improving 
Latent 
Semantic 
Analysis 
of 
Biomedical Literature Integrating UMLS Metathesaurus and Biomedical Pathways Databases,” in 
Biomedical Engineering Systems and Technologies, Fred, A., Filipe, J., Gamboa, H. (eds.), pp. 173-
187. 
Arijit D. 2013. “SMS Based FAQ Retrieval Using Latent Semantic Indexing,” in Multilingual Information 
Access in South Asian Languages, pp. 100-103. 
Baker, M. J. 2000. “Writing a Literature Review,” Marketing Review (1:2), pp. 219-247. 
Bandara, 
W., 
Miskon, 
S., 
and 
Fielt, 
E. 
2011. 
“A 
systematic, 
tool-supported 
method 
for 
conducting 
literature reviews in information systems,” in Proceedings of the 19
th
European Conference on 
Information Systems. 
Bawden, D., and Robinson, L. 2009. "The Dark Side of Information: Overload, Anxiety and Other 
Paradoxes and Pathologies," Journal of Information Science (35:2), pp. 180-191. 
