Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Journal of Business Ethics 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-018-3806-5
ORIGINAL PAPER
A Big‑Data Approach to Understanding the Thematic Landscape 
of the Field of Business Ethics, 1982–2016
Ying Liu
1
· Feng Mai
2
· Chris MacDonald
3
Received: 13 February 2017 / Accepted: 5 February 2018 
© Springer Science+Business Media B.V., part of Springer Nature 2018
Abstract
This study focuses on examining the thematic landscape of the history of scholarly publication in business ethics. We ana-
lyze the titles, abstracts, full texts, and citation information of all research papers published in the field’s leading journal, 
the Journal of Business Ethics, from its inaugural issue in February 1982 until December 2016—a dataset that comprises 
6308 articles and 42 million words. Our key method is a computational algorithm known as probabilistic topic modeling, 
which we use to examine objectively the field’s latent thematic landscape based on the vast volume of scholarly texts. This 
“big-data” approach allows us not only to provide time-specific snapshots of various research topics, but also to track the 
dynamic evolution of each topic over time. We further examine the pattern of individual papers’ topic diversity and the 
influence of individual papers’ topic diversity on their impact over time. We conclude this study with our recommendation 
for future studies in business ethics research.
Keywords Historical review · Intellectual structure · Latent thematic structure · Quantitative content analysis · Probabilistic 
topic modeling · Thematic landscape · Topic diversity
Introduction
What is the field of business ethics about? It is of course 
tempting to attempt to answer this question by providing a 
definition, one that seeks to explain the meaning(s) of the 
word “ethics” and the ways in which that word applies to a 
range of issues in the world of commerce. But a different 
kind of answer would explain what Business Ethics (as a 
field) is about by explaining what it is that scholars in the 
field do—in particular, what it is that they write about in 
attempting to advance discourse within the field. What are 
the specific topics and issues, in other words, that consti-
tute the bread and butter of scholars in the field? This paper 
seeks an answer of the latter type by focusing on examin-
ing the academic world of business ethics publishing. More 
specifically, this paper seeks to provide a comprehensive, 
data-driven analysis of the topics that have been covered 
in scholarly work on business ethics over roughly the last 
30 years by examining what has been published in the field’s 
dominant journal, the Journal of Business Ethics (JBE).
The field of business ethics is, in many senses, a mature 
field. Serious, focused scholarship in the field is at least sev-
eral decades old. And that scholarship is characterized not 
just by a range of normative and theoretical positions, but by 
commentaries on those positions and by commentaries on 
the commentaries. It is a literature that can be found spread 
across a number of specialty journals, as well as in relatively 
isolated pockets within various journals dedicated to specific 
industries, professions, and cognate academic fields.
The popularity of business ethics as a topic and the pro-
ductivity of scholars in business ethics as a field of scholarly 
exploration are both very substantial, and because of these 
it is, at this point, difficult to summarize the full breadth 
* 
Ying Liu 
lilianeliuying@gmail.com
Feng Mai 
feng.mai@stevens.edu
Chris MacDonald 
chris.macdonald@ryerson.ca
1
Susilo Institute for Ethics in the Global Economy, Questrom 
School of Business, Boston University, 595 Commonwealth 
Avenue, 515C, Boston, MA 02215, USA
2
School of Business, Stevens Institute of Technology, 1 Castle 
Point Terrace, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
3
Ted Rogers Leadership Centre, Ted Rogers School 
of Management, Ryerson University, 350 Victoria Street, 
Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada
Y. Liu et al.
1 3
of the field. Were an outsider to ask “What sorts of things 
do Business Ethicists talk about?” or worse, “What sorts 
of things have occupied Business Ethicists over recent dec-
ades?” it would be hard for even a senior scholar in the field 
to answer the question authoritatively with anything but a 
glib overgeneralization.
Previous Analyses
Over the years a number of scholars have published laudable 
attempts to summarize the field, or parts of it, using a vari-
ety of methods. Each of these scholars or teams of scholars 
has attempted to take a more or less systematic approach to 
arriving at some higher-level understanding of the literature 
and its key themes. We describe a few such attempts at this 
daunting task below.
To begin, it is worth pointing out the large number of use-
ful sub-topic surveys that have been published. The last three 
decades have seen survey articles on, among other topics, 
ethical decision making (e.g., Craft 2013; Ford and Rich-
ardson 1994; Lehnert et al. 2015; Loe et al. 2000; O’Fallon 
and Butterfield 2005; Tenbrunsel and Smith-Crowe 2008), 
corporate social responsibility and/or performance (e.g., 
Griffin and Mahon 1997; Malik 2015; Margolis and Walsh 
2003; McWilliams and Siegel 2000; Taneja et al. 2011; Van 
Beurden and Gossling 2008), consumer ethics (e.g., Vitell 
2003), corporate philanthropy (e.g., Gautier and Pache 2015; 
Liket and Simaens 2015), and marketing ethics (e.g., Gaski 
1999; Tsalikis and Fritzsche 1989). These studies constitute 
valuable contributions to scholarly understanding of these 
specific research streams, but obviously do little, even col-
lectively, to provide a comprehensive portrait of the field 
as a whole.
Other studies have contributed to scholarly understand-
ing of the field by examining the key journals in the field, 
in particular by asking questions related to journal quality, 
author productivity, or the contributions made by scholars 
from particular universities. Wicks and Derry (1996) and 
Albrecht et al. (2010), for example, assessed business eth-
ics journal quality based on opinion surveys. Sabrin (2002) 
ranked school and author productivity based on the number 
of publications and the number of pages published. War-
nick et al. (2014) identified individual scholars and assessed 
contributions on the basis of publication count. Paul (2004) 
compares three well-known business ethics journals (namely 
JBE, Business Ethics Quarterly, and Business & Society) to 
the Academy of Management Journal and Academy of Man-
agement Review based on the citation data from the Web of 
Science Journal Citation Reports (2001).
But other reviews have gone further and attempted to 
provide detailed examinations of the intellectual structure 
of the field or of its evolution over time. That is, they have 
attempted to divine the conceptual shape of the field and to 
shed light on just what it is that all of those authors writing 
in all of those journals have been writing about. We sum-
marize the results of a number of such studies briefly here, in 
chronological order, before moving on to our own analysis.
One significant attempt to sketch the scope of the entire 
field is a paper by Collins (2000), which reviews the range 
of articles—1500 of them—published in the course of the 
first 18 volumes (i.e., years) of JBE (1982–1999). Collins 
provides a statistical analysis that covers, for example, the 
decline of what he calls “essays” in favor of surveys and 
other empirical research in JBE: his analysis shows that 
while essays had made up 94% of what was published by 
JBE in 1982, that proportion had dropped to just 50% by 
1999. Collins also identifies six key topic headings and then 
summarizes briefly what had been written about each in JBE 
up to that point. The six topics identified by Collins include: 
prevalence of ethical behavior, ethical sensitivities, ethics 
codes and programs, corporate social performance and poli-
cies, human resource practices and policies, and ethics in 
the professions.
Based on Collins’s (2000) categorization, and extending 
his analysis, Calabretta et al. (2011) manually classify JBE’s 
publications from 1982 to 2008 into seven topics: ethical 
sensitivities, corporate culture and human resource prac-
tices, corporate social responsibility, business ethics and 
education, moral theory, marketing and advertising, and 
accounting and finance. These authors go further in offering 
a statistical analysis, according to which three topics—ethi-
cal sensitivities, CSR, and moral theory—dominated JBE 
during the period under study. The authors further point out 
how the relative proportion of each of those topics shifted 
over time (p. 504–505):
…in the first 8 years of JBE the dominant topic is 
moral theory, which then undergoes a steady decline 
as the field matures. During the second period of JBE, 
there is a sudden rise of interest in ethical sensitivi-
ties, whose dominance persists over the third period. 
The contemporary era is dominated by academic dis-
cussions on CSR. However, this recent trend does not 
cause articles on ethical sensitivities to decline sig-
nificantly.
Michalos and Poff (2013) likewise looked at publication 
patterns as a way of understanding the shape of the field. 
In particular, as the founding editors of JBE, they looked 
at what they refer to as “citation classics” from the jour-
nal—the 51 articles that were published in JBE between 
1982 and 2011 and that were each cited more than 55 times. 
Given the average number of citations for each of the 3663 
articles published in JBE during that period, being cited 
more than 55 times put these papers at 4 standard devia-
tions above the mean (p. 7). Using this focused sample as a 
A Big-Data Approach to Understanding the Thematic Landscape of the Field of Business Ethics,…
1 3
way of understanding the field, the authors are able to make 
interesting observations about:
• 
Authorship These articles had on average 1.84 authors 
each, and 86% of lead authors were from the USA. (p. 8)
• 
Methodology 67% of these classics involved some sort of 
quantitative analysis, while the other 33% were primarily 
philosophical. (p. 8)
• 
Topic “Very roughly, about 51.0% of the classics involve 
some sort of analyses of moral virtue and behaviour, 
17.6% are literature reviews, 15.7% are concerned with 
modeling ethical decision making, 9.8% concern some 
feature of codes of ethics and 5.9% are about corporate 
social and financial performance.” (p. 8)
A more recent attempt at surveying the landscape of 
scholarly business ethics was made by Arnold et al. (2015), 
each of whom has at some point served as Editor in Chief of 
Business Ethics Quarterly (BEQ). What those authors sought 
to do was to review all papers published in that journal’s 
first 25 volumes and manually categorize them according to 
research topic. While claiming to look at “Past Trends and 
Future Directions in Business Ethics and Corporate Respon-
sibility Scholarship,” they focus exclusively (and not surpris-
ingly, given their own roles) on work published in Business 
Ethics Quarterly. Their method was to take each article pub-
lished in volumes 1–25 of BEQ and to place each article into 
a single topical category. The resulting analysis produced 
a list of 8 “major themes.” Those are, in descending order 
of significance: conceptual business ethics, global ethics, 
normative business ethics, organizational ethics, CSR, stake-
holder theory, labor relations, and virtue ethics (p. vi). The 
analysis also identified 16 “minor themes,” including for 
example such topics as ethical leadership, game theory, and 
diversity (p. viii).
Another set of studies conducted over the past decade 
has moved beyond intuitive categorizations and has applied 
more advanced computational methods to analyzing the 
scope of the field and the range of topics it has historically 
covered.
For example, studies by Tseng et al. (2010), Ma (2009), 
and Ma et al. (2012) attempt to identify the intellectual 
structure of business ethics research by using bibliometric 
analysis (more specifically, citation and co-citation analy-
sis). This method allows them to identify the most influen-
tial articles from within their samples, but also allows the 
authors to attempt to identify the key research topics in the 
field. Each of these studies covers a relatively short period 
of time: Tseng et al. (2010) cover 1997–2006, Ma (2009) 
covers 1997–2006, and Ma et al. (2012) cover 2001–2008.
The general method these three studies share is as fol-
lows. The authors first compile the sample articles for the 
period under study, along with all citation information, and 
identify influential articles and authors based on sample arti-
cles’ citation information. To attempt to identify the intel-
lectual structure of the field, they further compile a “co-
citation matrix” for the sample articles, meaning they collect 
all information about the articles that the sample articles 
cite. They then identify article pairs that are co-cited by the 
sample articles, but only article pairs with a high frequency 
of co-citations are retained for further analysis. For instance, 
Ma (2009) only kept those cited article pairs with more than 
four co-citations. The condensed co-citation matrix is fur-
ther analyzed to identify clusters of papers that suggest the 
existence of underlying research topics at the research time.
To look for dominant topics, Ma (2009) divides the 
period under analysis into two segments: 1997–2001 and 
2002–2006. Although enhanced by technology, the main 
method utilized here is intuitive: the author “assigned 
descriptive names…based on our interpretation” (p. 260) 
of what popular articles were about. Ma’s analysis identifies 
four key research topics for the period 1997–2001: ethical 
decision making, corporate social responsibility and corpo-
rate performance, the status of business ethics research, and 
social justice and social contract theory. For 2002–2006, the 
analysis found the field to be dominated by the following 
subfields: “stakeholder theory in business ethics, consumer 
behavior and corporate social responsibility, relationship 
between corporate social responsibility and corporate per-
formance, including both theoretical exploration and empiri-
cal validation” (p. 261).
Tseng et al. (2010) used similar methods. Oddly, perhaps, 
they chose to study articles published in three journals: Jour-
nal of Business Ethics, Ethics and Behaviour, and Ethics. 
This is somewhat odd because their study is ostensibly a 
study of business ethics, and yet only one of the journals 
studied is explicitly a business ethics journal. The resulting 
analysis concludes that three research topics dominated the 
field during the time period from 1997 to 2006. The authors 
assert (p. 590) that key articles in the field were focused on 
“the interaction between ethical/unethical decision making, 
corporate governance and firm performance, ethical princi-
ples, and code[s] of conduct.”
The final paper in this trio of bibliographical analyses, 
Ma et al. (2012) attempts to understand the structure of the 
field by looking solely at articles published (between 2001 
and 2008) in the “top two business ethics journals included 
in the Social Sciences Citation Index” (p. 286), namely Busi-
ness Ethics Quarterly and JBE. The authors conclude that, 
“current business ethics studies cluster around four major 
research themes, including morality and social contract the-
ory, ethical decision making, corporate social responsibility, 
and stakeholder theory.”
Y. Liu et al.
1 3
Weaknesses of the Extant Analyses
While each of the studies cited above provides valuable 
insight, each of them is limited in one or more important 
ways.
The first limitation shared by many extant studies is that 
they only focus on “influential” articles, which are a small 
subset of articles selected using bibliographical measures. 
Note for example that the conclusions reached by Tseng 
et al. (2010) are based upon the influence of just 30 key 
articles. Although articles with the most citations deserve 
to be highlighted, to focus entirely on such a small subset 
limits one’s understanding of the field. The thousands of 
articles on the “long tail” of the bibliographical measures’ 
distribution are equally important. Through these articles, 
we can learn how scholars engage in meaningful conversa-
tions about various topics in business ethics and steadily 
move the field forward.
Another limitation of the methods employed in the stud-
ies cited above is their need to find a method to systemati-
cally describe the field by reference to “the” topics of spe-
cific papers, in spite of the fact that any given paper might 
plausibly be described as having several different topics. 
Consider, for example, a research paper (a hypothetical 
one) that attempted to take a methodologically innovative 
“stakeholder” approach to examining trust issues within 
the automotive industry. How should such a paper be cat-
egorized—as a methodology paper, a stakeholder paper, or 
an industry-specific paper? The authors of the studies cited 
above were generally, and sometimes painfully, aware of that 
problem. Michalos and Poff (2013, p. 8) for example, stated 
that, “we tried a variety of sorting articles by topics and/or 
types, but there are too many articles that might plausibly 
be characterized in several different ways.” Calabretta et al. 
(2011, p. 504) pointed out that “many articles dealing with 
work climate are actually testing the effects of work envi-
ronments on individuals’ ethical sensitivities.” Arnold et al. 
(2015, p. xv) stated that, “many articles could appropriately 
be placed into two or more categories,” and implicitly admit-
ted that this was a limitation of their analysis.
A further limitation has to do with time frames and the 
size of the dataset. Any study must necessarily focus on a 
limited time frame (although some studies, such as Collins 
(2000) and Arnold et al. (2015) are exhaustive analyses of 
the entire, but necessarily finite, set of works in a particular 
journal). In other cases, however, the brevity of the period 
of analysis is presumably the result of the limits of human 
capacity: human computational power only permits a single 
author or team to conduct analysis of a relatively small data-
set. And the problem of dataset size is of course only grow-
ing as the datasets themselves grow. Since 2008—the last 
year covered in most of the studies cited above—scholarly 
output in the field of business ethics has been accumulat-
ing rapidly. In JBE alone, there were 2077 research papers 
published between the beginning of 2008 and September 
2013.
1
This rapid accumulation of scholarly material pre-
sents a challenge to scholars seeking to understand the shape 
of the field as a whole. Whatever the strength of the papers 
cited above, we should have little confidence that they do 
much to represent the field as it exists today.
There are also problems that result not from the properties 
of any one analysis, but from trying to form an integrated 
view of the field by looking at these analyses as a group. 
As it happens, the results of these studies have been quite 
inconsistent. That is, the “sketch” of the field derived from 
each study tends to look quite different from the others. This 
is perhaps not surprising, given differences in methodology, 
time frame, and the list of journals covered by each.
One inconsistency lies in the fact that some studies iden-
tify just a handful of key themes, while others identify many 
more. Ma (2009), for example, identifies four key themes, 
while Arnold et al. (2015) identify eight major themes and 
16 minor ones. In some cases, such differences may rep-
resent simple parsimony on the part of authors who group 
many smaller themes into fewer bigger ones. Ma (2009), for 
instance, suggests that corporate governance is one of the 
four key themes of the business ethics literature. And yet the 
analysis by Arnold et al. (2015) suggests that corporate gov-
ernance is not even among the top 8 “major themes.”
2
But 
there are also cases in which a given concept plays a major 
role in one analysis, but is entirely absent in another. Arnold 
et al. suggest that their category simply called “global” is 
one of the very most important topics in the field, and yet 
that concept—whether it is thought of as “global” or “inter-
national” or “multinational”—is absent entirely from many 
other analyses.
Such differences in conclusions are not surprising (given 
methodological differences) and perhaps from some per-
spectives not even worrisome. After all, it is useful to see the 
range of analyses that result from different authors looking 
through different lenses. But these differences are a problem 
to the extent that the authors of these studies purport to be 
telling us what the field is really like—that is, purporting 
to use the tools at their disposal to get at some underlying 
reality. But this is also problematic to the extent that the 
analyses can be expected to result from the intuitions (and 
hence implicit biases) of the authors of the study. If one 
author looks at a study on the use of organizational codes of 
ethics to fight corruption in China and sees a paper that is 
1
Authors’ calculation.
2
Indeed, Arnold et al. (2015) list governance as 15th, and the topic 
would probably have been ranked even lower were it not bundled, in 
these authors’ analysis, with agency theory.
A Big-Data Approach to Understanding the Thematic Landscape of the Field of Business Ethics,…
1 3
fundamentally about codes, where another sees a paper that 
is fundamentally about corruption, those two authors are 
liable to paint very different pictures of the extant literature. 
The method we outline below—the method used in the pre-
sent study—goes a considerable distance toward eliminating 
such sources of bias.
A final limitation of previous papers is worth noting, and 
that is that their analyses tend to represent a static snapshot 
of the field within their chosen periods of study. That is, they 
tend to present a picture of what the field of business ethics 
looks like “right now” (where “now” is a time just prior to 
publication) or “back then” (where “back then” is a particu-
lar set of years). Some studies have attempted to provide a 
diachronic view by dividing the period studied into subsets. 
Calabretta et al. (2011), for example, divided their period of 
study (1982–2008) into four smaller time periods. But such 
divisions are somewhat crude, and arbitrary, and can provide 
only a very coarse image of the way the field has changed 
over time. The method used in the present study again goes 
some distance to overcome this problem by providing a truly 
dynamic view of the period under study.
Moving Forward
What we present here is the result of a study using a new 
method that has not been employed by any papers that have 
to date attempted to analyze and describe the field of busi-
ness ethics. The present paper attempts to generate not only 
a snapshot of academic publishing in the field, but also a 
longitudinal analysis, using advanced computational lin-
guistic tools—very roughly, tools representing a “big-data 
approach”—that have been developed only quite recently. 
These tools allow us to examine the full text of 6308 research 
articles published in the JBE between 1982 and 2016 and to 
objectively and systematically mine this body of work for 
its underlying themes.
The rapid development of computational linguistics meth-
ods in recent years has opened up a new range of possibili-
ties for analyzing the vast business ethics literature. In the 
present study, we follow the suggestion made by Lock and 
Seele (2015) in using the tools of quantitative content analy-
sis to examine the business ethics scholarship. In particular, 
we use these tools to analyze the texts of all titles, abstracts, 
full texts, and citation information of all research papers 
that have appeared in JBE during the years 1982–2016. We 
utilize a computer-based analysis method called probabilistic 
topic modeling (Blei 2012) as the primary method to con-
duct a historical thematic analysis, with the aim of revealing 
the research topics that have gained substantial scholarly 
attention, and to consider how these topics have evolved—
how, for instance, they emerge, mature, and decline. We also 
conduct additional analyses of how the “topic diversity” of 
papers (roughly, whether a given paper can be described 
as covering one or many topics) in the field has evolved 
over time, and how a given paper’s topic diversity affects its 
influence (judged by citations) over time. Our purpose, here, 
generally speaking, is to provide scholars with insight into 
the landscape and evolution of the field.
In particular, this paper asks and answers four questions:
1. 
What main topics have occupied scholars in the field 
over the last three decades?
2. 
How much emphasis did the literature collectively put 
on each of the topics identified, in any given year, and 
how has the ratio of topics evolved over time?
3. 
Do different topics have different levels of scholarly 
impact, and has that changed over time?
4. 
To what extent do articles in the field tend to focus on a 
single topic, as opposed to incorporating discussions of 
a plurality of topics? That is, how much topic diversity 
do articles manifest? And how does an article’s topic 
diversity affect its influence?
JBE as a Proxy for the Field
Before proceeding with our analysis, it is worth taking a 
moment to explain why it is that we have focused our atten-
tion here on JBE, and on JBE alone. Our simplifying meth-
odological assumption here is that JBE is capable of serving 
as a kind of proxy for the entire field of business ethics. 
Roughly speaking, our assumption is that what is true of 
JBE is true of business ethics as a whole: if a given topic 
is prominent in JBE in a given year, then it is a popular 
topic for the field at the time, and if a given topic is hardly 
mentioned in JBE, then it likely is not very popular in the 
field as a whole. Likewise, if the prevalence of a particular 
methodological approach within JBE has waned over recent 
years, then that is reason to think that that approach has been 
used less in the field as a whole.
While we realize that the correlation between any given 
journal and the field as a whole must necessarily be imper-
fect, we argue that work published in JBE serves as a strong 
approximation of work published in the field more gener-
ally. To begin, JBE covers a broad range of topics on busi-
ness ethics. This is evident from the aims and scope of the 
journal
3
: “(JBE) publishes only original articles from a 
wide variety of methodological and disciplinary perspec-
tives concerning ethical issues related to business that bring 
something new or unique to the discourse in their field. Con-
tributors examine moral aspects of systems of production, 
3
Journal 
of 
Business 
Ethics—Springer, 
link.springer.com/jour-
nal/10,551.
Y. Liu et al.
1 3
consumption, marketing, advertising, social and economic 
accounting, labor relations, public relations and organiza-
tional behavior.” Second, JBE is widely recognized in the 
broader business research community. JBE is the only Rank 
A business ethics journal in the FT 50 (Michalos and Poff 
2013, p. 1)—a list of the 50 journals used by the Finan-
cial Times when compiling the prestigious business school 
research rank. It is also the only ethics journal in Bloomb-
erg Businessweek’s list of the top 20 academic journals 
(Bloomberg Businessweek 2012). Therefore, as a leading 
specialized journal, JBE has played a significant role in set-
ting the research agenda for the entire field.
Quantitatively, previous studies such as those by Cala-
bretta et al. (2011) and Ma (2009) have found that JBE is 
the most frequently cited journal in business ethics, and 
Albrecht et al. (2010) found that JBE is regarded by busi-
ness ethics scholars as the field’s most prestigious journal. 
Also, it is not insignificant that JBE has published roughly 
ten times as many papers as some other prestigious jour-
nals in the field. For instance, in 2016, JBE published 321 
research articles, while BEQ published 16 and Business & 
Society (B&S) published 37 research articles. JBE, therefore, 
is quite simply where a huge proportion of business ethics 
articles get published. Finally, as shown later, our analyses 
provide evidence that the topical coverage between JBE and 
the field’s other leading journal, BEQ, is highly correlated. 
Hence, the conclusions based on our dataset are likely gen-
eralizable to other journals in the field.
However, we realize that there are limits to this approach. 
JBE is a leading journal, but there are of course (now) many 
others. And what JBE publishes is not necessarily perfectly 
reflective of the broader field. JBE, for example, seems to 
publish disproportionately more empirical work than does, 
for example, the more philosophically oriented BEQ. Based 
on our count, in 2016, there were 240 empirical studies out 
of the total 321 research articles (75%) published at JBE, 
while there were 7 empirical studies out of the total 16 
research articles (44%) published at BEQ. We acknowledge 
this limitation. But the value of the analysis presented here 
is not fully dependent upon our claim that JBE serves as a 
proxy for the field. A more modest version of our claim is 
that, rather than presenting JBE as a proxy for the entire 
field, what we present here is a robust analysis of what has 
been published—what has been discussed—in the field’s 
dominant journal. We feel that this in itself is a significant 
contribution.
Method
To present a dynamic and comprehensive picture of thematic 
landscape of the field of business ethics (and to answer the 
four research questions noted above), we use here a tool 
known as probabilistic topic modeling.
Probabilistic topic modeling (PTM) is a suite of statistical 
machine learning methods that analyze the observed words 
within a target body of text in order to discover the latent 
thematic structure—the pattern of themes present within the 
body of text—and how those themes evolve over time. This 
process can usefully be thought of as “reversing” the pro-
cess by which an article is composed. Composition (i.e., the 
process of authoring) proceeds by beginning with a topic or 
set of related topics, deciding how much to focus on each of 
the topics covered in the paper,
4
and then selecting words 
appropriate to discussing that topic. PTM reverses that pro-
cess, by picking out clusters of words (words used frequently 
together in a particular text) and determining the frequency 
with which those clusters occur. We can then use that data 
to suggest which topics those word clusters would be best 
suited to discuss. PTM aims thereby to find the hidden the-
matic structure or topic distribution that is most likely to 
generate the word combinations observed within the text 
(Blei 2012). This sort of topic modeling allows the themes 
to emerge from the analysis without prior labeling or coding 
of the texts—that is, there is no need for a human analyst to 
tell the algorithm which topics to look for. Assuming the 
availability of a reasonable amount of computational power, 
the analysis proceeds by annotating each article from within 
the desired sample in order to find out the range of topics 
covered in each, a task that would be difficult at best and 
perhaps impossible to accomplish by hand (Blei 2012).
The dataset for the present study was made up of the full 
text of articles published in the JBE between 1982 and 2013 
and the abstracts of articles between 2014 and 2016. These 
together constitute a sample of some 42 million words.
Our article sample includes all and only research papers 
published in JBE from its inaugural issue in 1982 to 2016. 
We excluded articles that are non-research papers, including 
book reviews, research notes, commentaries, and editorial 
notes. We analyze the titles, abstracts, and the full text of all 
the research papers without relying on author-provided key-
words. We chose this method for several reasons. First, PTM 
enables us to conduct large-scale analysis to identify key-
words organically: the process determines algorithmically 
4
For example, the author of a hypothetical paper on the ethics and 
legality of bribery must necessarily (if not necessarily consciously) 
decide how much space (or how many words) to allocate to defining 
bribery, how much space to allocate to questions of the ethics of brib-
ery, and how much space to allocate to the legality of bribery.
A Big-Data Approach to Understanding the Thematic Landscape of the Field of Business Ethics,…
1 3
which words are in fact “key” words in a paper by looking at 
the text itself. This makes author-provided keywords redun-
dant. Second, some early JBE papers simply do not have 
author-provided keywords, and so relying on such keywords 
would necessarily limit our dataset. Third, author-provided 
keywords are often subjective and inconsistent: there is no 
formal method by which authors choose keywords. The main 
purpose of keywords is to describe the article to a broader 
audience as well as describing it to automatic information 
retrieval systems such as academic search engines. So as 
a matter of caution, authors who know this may provide 
only very generic keywords. Such generic keywords then 
have a reduced capacity to capture what is distinctive about 
a given article. Keyword choice may also be flippant, idi-
osyncratic, or even ideologically motivated. Fourth, even 
when keywords are provided consistently and rigorously, 
inconsistency in the number of author-provided keywords 
can also bring noise to the analysis because the results may 
be biased toward those papers that simply happen to provide 
more keywords. For all these reasons, we eschew author-pro-
vided keywords and instead base our analysis on the authors’ 
complete narrative, including article titles, abstracts, and (for 
1982 and 2013) the full text of the papers.
We compiled our dataset from three sources: JSTOR, 
Thomson Reuters Web of Science, and Springer Sci-
ence + Business Media. JSTOR Data for Research (dfr.
jstor.org) is a free, self-service tool that allows research-
ers to interact with and choose content from JSTOR. For 
each JBE article, we collected article metadata (i.e., title, 
abstract, author(s), volume, issue, and publication date). We 
also collected word and phrase frequencies for the full text 
of each paper, generated with JSTOR’s optical character 
reader (OCR) technology. We then obtained each paper’s 
citation data from the Web of Science. According to Thom-
son Reuters (2014), the Web of Science is the world’s most 
trusted citation index, a tool that has become the gold stand-
ard source of data for research aimed at identifying hidden 
patterns and at gaining insight into research trends. We thus 
collected each research paper’s citation data by year from 
the Web of Science. Because JSTOR Data for Research has 
a 3-year embargo window, full-text word frequencies for 
articles from 2014 to 2016 are not available. We collected 
title, abstract, keywords, and metadata from JBE’s publisher, 
Springer Science + Business Media, to complete the sample. 
It is also worth noting that there are 48 papers published by 
JBE during the target period for which citation information 
is missing from the Web of Science. Most of those articles 
are from supplemental issues published in 2011. We col-
lected the citation information for these articles from Sco-
pus, an alternative to the Web of Science (Chadegani et al. 
2013; Vieira and Gomes 2009). In the end, we obtained a 
sample of 6308 research papers, representing 139 volumes 
published between February 1982 and December 2016.
The specific method of PTM used here is known as latent 
Dirichlet allocation (LDA). Technical details of LDA have 
been relegated to Appendix 1. Interested readers can look 
there for more information. Readers primarily interested in 
the outcome of our study can feel free to proceed to our 
results, which we present next.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Our 
Method
The big-data approach utilized in the present paper has sev-
eral advantages. The first and most obvious advantage is 
completeness. The tools used here have allowed us exhaus-
tively to examine every research article published in the 
Journal of Business Ethics during the period from 1982 to 
2016. As noted above, this amounts to some 6308 articles. 
It is further worth noting that these articles together consti-
tute a total of approximately 42 million words. No human 
reader has the capacity to read, comprehend, and reliably 
summarize even a fraction of such a vast dataset. A human 
reader, reading an ambitious 10 articles each day, 365 days 
per year would need a year and a half just to get through all 
these papers, let alone to conduct any sort of meaningful 
analysis. The second advantage of our method is objectiv-
ity. The algorithms used are able to “pull” themes from our 
very large dataset, whereas other studies that have attempted 
to summarize the field required the authors to begin their 
analysis with a preconceived set of themes or topics that they 
expect to see. Under the older method, specific articles are 
then categorized by placing them into one or more of those 
preconceived categories.
Our method also has the advantage that it allows us to 
account for the fact that a particular paper may discuss more 
than one topic, to track the weighting of each topic within 
each paper, and to tally those. Methods that simply count 
“paper topics” do not have this virtue. Imagine, for exam-
ple, a fictional paper that is primarily about “leadership,” 
but that devotes 20% of its attention to questions of “ethics 
education.” Most methods used previously would count this 
exclusively as a paper about leadership—the discussion of 
ethics education would simply be lost. And examination of 
dozens or hundreds of such papers would result in a badly 
skewed analysis, which would imply—wrongly—that no 
one is paying any attention to ethics education at all.
5
Our 
5
Note the statistical analogy with voting systems: a first-past-the-
poll voting system in a 2-party jurisdiction can end up allocating 
100% of votes to a single party, even if the “other” party got 49% of 
the votes in every local election. Categorizing papers by “main topic” 
is effectively a first-past-the-poll voting system. Such systems have 
their merits, but their results can easily misrepresent the shape of the 
electorate.
Y. Liu et al.
1 3
system tracks all of the word clusters (topics) that emerged 
algorithmically and counts them proportionally, which gives 
us a far more granular result.
This approach also has certain limitations. First, the 
algorithm is capable of finding clusters of words, but it is 
incapable of naming them in a meaningful way. A simple 
fictional example will help explain the issue. Imagine an 
algorithm finding three words occurring repeatedly together, 
in various published articles: “yellow,” “hot,” and “orbit.” 
The algorithm would not be able to infer that these articles 
were all about the sun. It would take (barring improvements 
in available technology) a human to make that inference. 
With regard to the present research, this means that while the 
algorithm has identified clusters of words, we the researchers 
have been left to give those clusters names, such as “ethical 
leadership.” This inevitably involves a degree of subjectiv-
ity—different researchers may well have assigned different 
names to these clusters, and indeed, the authors of the pre-
sent paper occasionally disagreed among themselves as to 
the best name for a particular cluster.
Relatedly, it is worth noting that the algorithm used is 
(necessarily, given the size of our dataset) an “unsupervised” 
algorithm. This term, quite common in machine learning, 
refers to the fact that the algorithm performs seeking clus-
ters and then categorizes articles as including those clusters 
without any human intervention. That is, there is no moment 
within our process at which a human looks at each cluster 
found and says either “yes, that looks like a genuine cluster 
of topics,” or “no, that looks like a spurious correlation of 
words.” This is the price that is paid for using an algorithm 
capable of examining trends within millions of published 
words independently: independence is both a strength and 
a weakness.
Finally, the method used here relies on the frequency of 
occurrence of terms. This means that the algorithm will end 
up ignoring altogether topics that are discussed only by a 
relatively small (but perhaps significant) cluster of articles. 
What this implies is that this method is capable only of pro-
viding a “big-picture” view of the field. Fine-grained analy-
sis of sub-topics and sub-sub-topics and how they are related 
again would require human intervention.
Results
1. 
What main topics have occupied scholars in the field 
over the last three decades?
The main outputs of the PTM are two probability distri-
butions (relative frequency tables). The first is a topic-word 
distribution that gives the probability of an author using each 
word to write about a topic, i.e., the high (and low)-fre-
quency words for each topic. The second is a document-topic 
distribution which provides the topical composition of 
each article, i.e., what each article is about. We can view 
the topic-word distribution as a “soft” clustering of words. 
Each cluster of words is used in a similar context, yet the 
words can appear in different clusters with varying frequen-
cies (similar to an exploratory factor analysis). Our analysis 
identified 18 word clusters, which we interpret as embodying 
topics that are latent in the observed texts. Each such cluster 
is composed of a number of keywords appearing frequently 
together. For example, one set of words occurring frequently 
together included the following:
fraud, audit, accounting, professional, control, system, 
financial reporting, accountability, auditing, quality, 
reporting, integrity, internal control, fraudulent, finan-
cial, scandal, internal, profession, sanction, internal 
audit.
6
The PTM algorithm was able to identify this cluster of key-
words as appearing relatively frequently together within 
our dataset. Note that PTM provides the probability of all 
the words appearing under this topic; we here list only the 
twenty words with the highest probability.
However, as noted above, the algorithm cannot apply a 
label to this cluster. The keywords merely supply the “data 
for ethical interpretation or sensemaking” (Lock and Seele 
2015, p. S35), a task that must necessarily be taken on by 
human interpreters. For ease of reference (and greater ana-
lytic utility) we have labeled each cluster (or topic) with a 
descriptive word or phrase. We took a two-pronged approach 
when labeling each topic. First, we interpret “the bag of 
words” as a whole for each topic, paying special attention 
to the top words with high frequency. Then, we made use 
of the document-topic distribution provided by PTM. For 
each topic, we selected articles with topic weight greater 
than 50% and sorted them by citation counts. Appendix 3 
lists five such articles under each topic. We made sure that 
the topic names are in congruence with these high-impact 
articles by cross-checking with the author-provided key-
words, title, and abstract. The cluster above, for example, 
we have labeled “accounting ethics.” As another example, 
here is another set of 20 words constituting a cluster appear-
ing together frequently within our dataset:
fair trade, cooperative, worker, employment, labor, 
export, labour, factory, union, safety, buyer, global 
supply chain, workforce, wage, foreign, supplier, 
domestic, working condition, work life, trade.
We have labeled this cluster “fair trade and labor.” Table 1 
provides the full list of the 18 topics our process uncovered 
6
In this paper, we have listed only the twenty words with the highest 
frequency within each word cluster.
A Big-Data Approach to Understanding the Thematic Landscape of the Field of Business Ethics,…
1 3
and the top 20 keywords associated with each. What Table 1 
provides is essentially an objective analysis of the topics 
examined in JBE over the first three decades of its existence. 
And, we argue, given the salience of JBE in the field, it is 
reasonable to infer that these 18 topics constitute a rough 
approximation of the outlines of the field as a whole.
It is worth emphasizing that while the labels we have 
applied are subject to debate (they are in no way authorita-
tive and are merely labels that make intuitive sense to us), 
the clusters of keywords themselves and the articles under 
each topic, however, are objective features of the dataset.
One observation worth making at this point is that this list 
of topics includes topics not identified by previous studies. 
Table 1 
Major topics in Journal of Business Ethics (1982–2016)
Topic name
Top 20 words in topic
Virtue ethics
Virtue, leadership, business ethic, justice, human, perspective, compassion, virtue ethic, wisdom, principle, 
meaningful work, spiritual, motivation, normative, life, humility, spirituality, philosophy, religious, morality
Employee ethical behaviors
Risk, fairness, arbitration, sanction, goodwill, structure, labor market, unethical, dissonance, identifiable, 
irresponsible, transgression, consequence, legitimation strategy, job, harm, harmful effect, justify, ethical 
reasoning, cultural
Consumer ethics
Consumer, product, green, privacy, information, consumption, attribute, ethical consumption, online, service, 
attitude, purchase, intention, evaluation, perceive, brand, attitude toward, benefit, consumer willingness, 
sustainable consumption
Corporate social responsibility
Sustainability, corporate social responsibility, environmental, legitimacy, approach, impact, identify, influence, 
role, social responsibility, strategic, corporation, organization, sustainable, environment, organizational, green, 
corporate sustainability, innovation, challenge
Gender
Gender, family, moral judgment, male, role, women, difference, career, decision make, feminist, biological, 
mindset, position, male female, feminine, ethnic diversity, sex discrimination, female manager, woman man, 
gender equality
Accounting ethics
Fraud, audit, accounting, professional, control, system, financial reporting, accountability, auditing, quality, 
reporting, integrity, internal control, fraudulent, financial, scandal, internal, profession, sanction, internal audit
Marketing ethics
Brand, advertising, product, marketing, news, audience, source, media, impression management, child, negative, 
obesity, market, reputation, credibility, campaign, blame, advertisement, image, consumer
Ethical decision making
Ethical decision making, moral intensity, scenario, ethical judgment, value orientation, judgment, unethical, 
decision make, ethical decision, attitude toward, intention, ethical predisposition, attitude, personality type, 
business ethic, personal, dilemma, managerial, personal moral philosophy, religiously
Ethics education
Student, business school, business ethic, education, teaching, course, training, learning, MBA, effectiveness, 
university, management education, subject, curriculum, faculty, ethic course, approach, unethical intention, 
instructor, classroom
Corporate personhood
Right, political, duty, contract, legal, capitalism, normative, liberal, status, justice, morality, economic, debate, 
market, market failure, equality, commercial, well, freedom, obligation
International development
Global, political, governance, compliance, regulation, government, economic, institutional, policy, international, 
institution, country, economy, united nations global compact, local, developing country, national, regulatory, 
multinational enterprise, context
Qualitative case studies
Question, think, personal, questionnaire, know, view, say, situation, student, story, believe, opinion, response, 
thought, experience, attitude, survey, word, respondent, event
Managerial morality
Insider trading, insider, payment, disclosure, covenant, fraud, access, information, trustworthy, transaction, 
delay, ban, legal, purchase, amend, injustice, scandal, trading, moral obligation, abnormal
Doing well by doing good
Financial, environmental, performance, corporate governance, investment, investor, earning management, cor-
porate environmental, shareholder, reputation, policy, incentive, compensation, managerial, stock, significant, 
positive, affect, corporate philanthropy, corporate social
Ethical leadership
Ethical leadership, leader, effect, influence, perception, trust, leadership, impact, moral identity, job satisfac-
tion, workplace, positive, antecedent, moral disengagement, justice, ethical climate, fairness, power, authentic 
leadership, organizational identification
Fair trade and labor
Fair trade, cooperative, worker, employment, labor, export, labour, factory, union, safety, buyer, global supply 
chain, workforce, wage, foreign, supplier, domestic, working condition, work life, trade
Corporate governance
Tax, profit, tax avoidance, taxpayer, capital, maximization, loan, obligation, value pluralism, tax evasion, gain, 
shareholder, fiduciary duty, tax practitioner, agency problem, tax morale, shareholder interest, income, owner-
ship, proprietor
National culture
Corruption, country, China, collectivism, Confucianism, Buddhism, national, love money, cultural value, 
western, guanxi, individualism, ethical behavior, Muslim, materialism, cross cultural, Islamic, international, 
bribery, American
Y. Liu et al.
1 3
Take for example the topic we have labeled “gender.” While 
other studies—such as, for example, Collins (2000)—identi-
fied gender as part of a larger topic (in Collins’s case, that 
larger topic was “ethical sensitivities”), no other study that 
we know of has identified gender (or, a more expansive and 
equally plausible label, “The Effect of Gender on Ethical 
Reasoning”) as a major theme in the field. Our analysis 
found that, between 1982 and 2013, a total of 1734 research 
papers from within our dataset touch meaningfully upon this 
topic. Among those 1734 papers, 304 papers discuss this 
topic with a weight of above 0.2 (i.e., roughly 20% of the 
discussion within each of those papers is about gender) and 
95 papers have this topic as the main topic (with a topic 
coverage proportion of above 0.5, or 50%).
2. 
How much emphasis did the literature collectively put 
on each of the topics identified, in any given year, and 
how has the ratio of topics evolved over time?
Based on the proportions of the topics in each article, we 
calculated the yearly sum of each topic’s weights across all 
articles that were published in each year being studied. This 
yearly sum of a topic’s weights was then used to calculate 
the proportion of the topic across the 18 identified topics. 
This proportion is interpreted as the degree of scholarly 
attention that was paid to the topic in a particular year.
Based on this, we can map out the evolution of the popu-
larity of each topic among scholars over the period under 
study.
Figure 1 provides an example. It charts, over the 35-year 
period under examination, the trend in the popularity of the 
topic cluster we have labeled “ethics education.” Time is 
plotted on the X-axis, and the Y-axis indicates the proportion 
of scholarly attention devoted to the topic. For instance, in 
1996, among the 18 topics identified here, 13.7% of schol-
arly attention was dedicated to the topic of ethics education.
Figure 2 plots the changing trend of the proportion of 
scholarly attention paid to each of our 18 topics over the 
years from 1982 to 2016.
7
The results are in many cases striking. For instance, we 
see a steady downward trend in attention to virtue ethics 
and likewise a downward trend in attention to fair trade and 
labor over the period studied, and a substantial upswing in 
attention to ethical leadership and international develop-
ment. Other topics rose in prominence during the early years 
of JBE, but then peaked and have subsequently declined. 
Attention to ethics education, for example, seems to have 
peaked around 1990 and has declined in relative importance 
ever since.
It is worth emphasizing, however, that these are propor-
tions: the downward trend in attention to the topic virtue 
ethics does not necessarily mean that less is being written 
about that topic now than was the case 30 years ago. It may 
simply mean that much more is now being written about 
other topics, with the result that virtue ethics represents a 
smaller proportion of the total.
A second caveat when interpreting our results is that topi-
cal proportions are not equivalent to the extent of contribu-
tions.
8
Our model measures how much ink is spilled on a 
topic, which may or may not represent meaningful contribu-
tions to the topic. For example, in an article that discusses 
corporate governance and CSR, the authors may use cor-
porate governance-related terms more frequently, yet the 
Fig. 1 
Evolution of the topic 
“ethics education” over years
7
We generate the smoothed lines using locally weighted scatterplot 
smoothing (LOWESS).
8
We thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing out this important 
difference.
A Big-Data Approach to Understanding the Thematic Landscape of the Field of Business Ethics,…
1 3
actual theoretical contribution may be equal or even greater 
in CSR. In addition, the seed ideas of many contemporary 
topics may be traced back to earlier articles on unrelated top-
ics. Thus, our analyses provide only a bird’s-eye view of the 
major themes. Readers interested in the intellectual history 
of a specific topic could use our results in conjunction with 
bibliographical analyses.
To provide a more stark illustration of the dynamics of 
topic distribution in the field over time (i.e., how the propor-
tions have shifted), we use a stacked column chart to show 
the snapshots of the proportional distribution of topics in 
1982 and 2013 (see Fig. 3). The height of each block within 
the columns indicates the proportion of a particular topic 
in a given year. The ordering of topics shown in the two 
columns is constant, so that it is easier to see which topics 
have gained in popularity over the three decades as well as 
those that have declined in relative popularity.
The results are striking. In 1982, two topics—corporate 
personhood and fair trade and labor—account for over half 
(56.3%) of scholarly attention. In 2013, those two topics 
Fig. 2 
Topic focus in JBE 
(1982–2016)
Y. Liu et al.
1 3
together account for just 8.3% of scholarly attention. Indeed, 
the 5 topics at the top of both columns went from together 
representing 83.7% of articles in 1982 to representing less 
than 18.1% in 2013.
As a robustness check of our results, we provide a visual 
comparison of the topical trends of JBE and BEQ in Appen-
dix 4. Most topics share similar trends in JBE and BEQ. 
The average contemporary correlation of topical weights in 
JBE and BEQ is 0.73 between 1991 and 2011 (the years 
we have full-text data for both journals). The correlation 
also exhibits an increasing trend, rising to 0.84 in 2011. 
Small discrepancies remain. For instance, BEQ puts greater 
emphasis on more theoretical topics such as corporate per-
sonhood and less weight on topics such as national culture. 
Overall, though, the relative emphasis that business ethics 
scholars place on different topics is similar in the two lead-
ing journals.
3. 
Do different topics have different levels of scholarly 
impact? And has that changed over time?
In order to answer these questions, we need first to meas-
ure each article’s impact and then each individual topic’s 
impact. We employ two approaches, namely total citations 
and average citations per year, to measure a paper’s impact. 
Citations can be considered a proxy of an article’s popular-
ity and impact in a field, because in principle authors cite 
those works that have influenced their work in one way or 
another (Calabretta et al. 2011; Culnan 1987; Tahai and 
Meyer 1999). To calculate a paper’s total citations, we count 
the total number of times an article has been cited during the 
study period. We calculate the average citations per year as 
another measure to level the playing field for newer articles 
and control for possible age effect. For each individual top-
ic’s impact, we calculate the individual topic’s proportional 
impact by multiplying the topic’s weight with the paper’s 
total citations or yearly average citations. We then calculate 
a topic’s impact in a certain year by aggregating paper-topic 
citations across all papers published in a year.
We place bars representing the overall impact of papers 
in each topic next to bars representing impact post-2006 in 
Fig. 3 
Comparison of topic 
composition in 1982 and 2013
A Big-Data Approach to Understanding the Thematic Landscape of the Field of Business Ethics,…
1 3
Fig. 4. From this figure, we can see that overall, some top-
ics such as corporate social responsibility, ethical leader-
ship, ethical decision making, and doing well by doing good 
have more impact than other topics, including managerial 
morality, employee ethical behaviors, corporate govern-
ance, and marketing ethics. This figure also shows that some 
topics (i.e., corporate social responsibility, ethical leader-
ship, dong well by doing good, international development, 
national culture, fair trade and labor, consumer ethics) 
have gained more attention or become more popular among 
scholars in recent years, compared to their overall historical 
popularity.
4. 
To what extent do articles in the field tend to focus on a 
single topic, as opposed to incorporating discussions of 
a plurality of topics? That is, how much topic diversity 
Fig. 4 
Impact of topics (overall 
versus after 2006)
Y. Liu et al.
1 3
do articles manifest? And how does an article’s topic 
diversity affect its influence?
We define topic diversity as the extent to which a multi-
plicity of topics is discussed within an individual paper. The 
higher the topic diversity, the higher the number of topics 
explored within a given paper. The extreme case at one end 
of the spectrum would be a paper that pays equal attention 
to each of our 18 topics (extremely diverse), and at the other 
end of the spectrum would be a paper that only pays atten-
tion to just one topic (extremely concentrated).
To examine this question, we need a measure of the dif-
ferences in the extent to which particular topics are dis-
cussed in an article. Since differences, here, mean quantita-
tive inequalities, we used the measure known as the Gini 
coefficient. Gini coefficients will be familiar to many readers 
as a way to express levels of economic inequality within a 
nation, but the mathematical notion is much more general 
and has been used for many purposes. Interested readers can 
find details in Appendix 2.
How Much Topic Diversity Have Articles Manifested 
During Each Year During the Period Examined, 
and How has that Diversity Evolved Over Time?
We first calculate the yearly average of topic diversity across 
articles that were published in a particular year, and then we 
plot the trend as shown in Fig. 5. The X-axis indicates the 
time (i.e., year), and Y-axis indicates the yearly average of 
topic diversity.
From this figure, we can see the yearly average topic 
diversity increased abruptly in 1993 and reached a peak 
in 1999. After 2000, the yearly average topic diversity 
declined, but it is still higher than it was before 1993. The 
possible reason might be that, after around 1990, there was a 
substantial shift in scholarly attention from initial discussion 
of the theoretical and moral foundations of business ethics 
to more practical concerns (Lock and Seele 2015) and the 
literature started to see more and more empirical studies 
(Calabretta et al. 2011; Lock and Seele 2015; Robertson 
1993). Empirical studies often touch upon several topics to 
uncover certain relationships. This is evidenced by several 
studies (e.g., Calabretta et al. 2011; Michalos and Poff 2013) 
that encountered difficulties when categorizing articles into 
one topic.
The results of our PTM reflect this trend. After 1990, 
topics that are closely related to practical issues—such as 
corporate social responsibility, international development, 
and doing well by doing good—showed rapid growth. With 
the continuously increasing attention paid to these practical 
issues as shown in Figs. 2 and 3, scholarly attention became 
more concentrated, leading to decreased topic diversity after 
around 2000 as shown in Fig. 5.
The Impact of Topic Diversity: Does the “Topic 
Diversity” of a Given Article Affect How Likely 
that Article is to be Cited? That is, Does a Single 
Article Gain or Lose Impact if It is a Highly Focused 
Examination of a Single Issue (as Opposed 
to Spreading Its Attention Across a Number 
of Topics)?
As part of our analysis, we investigated whether an arti-
cle’s topic diversity has an effect on its impact. We first use 
a scatterplot to identify the overall trend. Figure 6 shows 
the overall trend with the X-axis indicating topic diversity 
and the Y-axis indicating each paper’s influence measured 
by total citations. From this chart, we can see the overall 
negative relationship between a paper’s topic diversity and 
its influence. The higher a paper’s topic diversity, the less 
influence it is likely to have.
To test the relationship between an article’s topic diver-
sity and its influence, we use ordinary least squares (OLS) 
regression to test whether there is a linear relationship while 
controlling for possible confounding variables. As a robust-
ness check, we use negative binomial regression, since the 
dependent variable can be considered count data.
We then quantify the relationship using regression models 
(i.e., ordinary least squares regression and negative bino-
mial regression), using the citation measure as the dependent 
variable and topic diversity as the focus independent vari-
able. We also added time (year) and major topic (defined as 
the topic with the highest weight) as controls. Table 2 shows 
the results. Regardless of the model we use, both tests show 
there is a significant, negative relationship between a paper’s 
topic diversity and its scholarly influence. This finding pro-
vides a caution for future researchers that a paper’s topic 
diversity should be carefully designed. Including a broad 
scope of topics (i.e., high topic diversity) in a single paper 
Fig. 5 
Trend of average topic diversification in an article (1982–
2016)
A Big-Data Approach to Understanding the Thematic Landscape of the Field of Business Ethics,…
1 3
does not guarantee that the paper will have high impact. For 
some articles, high topic diversity may mean a lack of focus, 
leading to lower influence. However, topic diversity may be 
correlated with interdisciplinarity, and a recent study pub-
lished on Nature (Van Noorden 2015) contends that interdis-
ciplinary research receives less attention than the norm over 
the first 3 years following publication, but in the long term 
(after 13 years), such work gains influence. We posit that this 
phenomenon might well be observed in business ethics in 
the future, as many scholars have called for interdisciplinary 
studies in this field (e.g., Arnold et al. 2015).
Conclusions
The work presented here implies three different types of 
conclusions, which we present here in ascending order of 
importance. These include: our own interpretation of the 
data outlined here; the conclusions others may reach through 
interpreting the data we have provided; and conclusions 
about the power of computer algorithms and “big data” to 
help us understand the shape of the field of business ethics. 
We proceed next to touch upon each of these in sequence.
Fig. 6 
Topic diversification and influence of an article
Table 2 
Effects of topic 
diversity on citation measures
Robust standard errors in parentheses. We control for publication year and an article’s major topic in the 
regression models. Year and major topic effects are omitted in the table
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1
Model
OLS
OLS
Negative binomial
Negative binomial
Dependent variable
Total citations
Avg. citations/year
Total citations
Avg. citations/year
Topic diversity
− 36.01***
− 4.102***
− 2.441***
− 3.098***
(3.849)
(0.319)
(0.227)
(0.240)
Constant
− 23.20***
− 3.312***
− 0.130
− 4.250***
(3.661)
(0.290)
(0.273)
(0.295)
Observations
6308
6308
6308
6308
Pseudo-R
2
0.210
0.175
0.074
0.094
Y. Liu et al.
1 3
First, what can we conclude about publication trends in 
business ethics based on the analysis provided here? Our 
analysis has identified, on an objective basis, the 18 topics 
(again, see Table 1) that have dominated the business ethics 
scholarship, as approximated by what was published in JBE 
over the first three decades of the journal’s existence. We 
believe this is a significant contribution and a significant 
improvement over previous attempts to produce an overview 
of scholarship in the field. Our list has the virtue of being 
relatively objective, since it was generated organically by the 
probabilistic topic modeling algorithm we used. This means 
that, regardless of what anyone, no matter their depth of 
knowledge, feels are the important topics in the field, these 
18 themes are the ones that have dominated the field over 
the last three decades.
We have also been able to demonstrate important shifts 
in emphasis. In the early 1980s, corporate personhood was a 
dominant theme in the literature; by 2013, it was a relatively 
minor one. In the early 1980s, CSR and ethical leadership 
were both trivial themes; by 2013, they had become the two 
most prominent topics of business ethics scholarship. We 
are also pleased that our analysis has revealed significant 
topics (such as gender) not identified as important topics by 
previous studies.
Our analysis also provides strong empirical evidence 
for trends in the popularity of various topics from 1982 to 
2016. Some of those findings are not surprising. It is not at 
all surprising, for instance, that scholarly attention to the 
corporate social responsibility has only grown, given the 
increasing salience of that topic culturally and politically and 
its increasing significance as an area requiring attention by 
top corporate leaders. It is likewise unsurprising that ethical 
leadership has gained an increasing share of scholarly atten-
tion. Other results are surprising indeed. Accounting ethics 
has remained nearly “flat” (having reached a small peak in 
the late 1990s) in spite of the huge public attention to that 
topic resulting from the large number of accounting scandals 
that have occurred, especially since the turn of the millen-
nium. It is perhaps also surprising that scholarly attention to 
corporate personhood has (according to our data) declined 
very substantially since the early 1980s. The year 2013 saw 
what was very near to a 30-year low in scholarly attention 
paid to that topic, in spite of the public significance of that 
topic, demonstrated most acutely by the controversy over the 
court cases of Citizens United vs FEC and Hobby Lobby.
9
It is likewise surprising that attention to the related topic of 
corporate governance has subsided, albeit less dramatically, 
over the period under study.
We also consider it noteworthy that our data provide 
evidence of a significant, negative relationship between a 
paper’s topic diversity and its scholarly influence. We found 
that—with rare exceptions—the more topics a given paper 
attempted to cover in substantial detail, the less impact it 
had. Yet this should not be interpreted as a definite signal for 
avoiding such research. For one, the citation-based impact 
can be a poor proxy for quality—especially in the short run. 
Second, the pseudo-R
2
of the regressions is low, ranging 
from 0.07 to 0.21 depending on the model used. This sug-
gests that topic diversity only plays a small role in explaining 
the future citations of an article. The actual content of an 
article, along with other factors outside the model, is much 
more important in determining the article’s impact. Finally, 
as an anonymous reviewer notes, rarely can any of the topics 
in business ethics be separated from other topics. Synthesis 
of these topics is simply as critical as singular analysis of 
them in the literature.
While we stand by the conclusions presented in the sec-
tion immediately above, we think our main contribution is 
to have analyzed an enormous body of literature and made 
the data available to readers of this journal. Those readers 
may make use of these data what they will. For example, we 
would welcome and encourage others to examine in detail 
the 18 word clusters that our analysis produced.
We think that the data we have provided on trends in the 
literature provides fodder for a potentially wide range of 
analyses. We thus consider this study a provocative and use-
ful springboard to future careful research. What should we 
make of the downward trend in scholarly attention to corpo-
rate personhood over the period under study? Does it reflect 
a trend in the broader literature? A cultural trend? A change 
in the way business ethics scholars are educated and trained? 
We have our suspicions, but we invite analyses on the part 
of others in the field. What is it that accounts for the very 
substantial leap in topic diversity that apparently occurred 
in 1993? Does this reflect a change in scholarly practice, or 
perhaps a change in editorial policy at JBE? In fact, the trend 
lines for each of the 18 topics identified—whether consid-
ered individually or in comparison with each other—open 
up a number of questions. Does each trend reflect something 
internal to the field, or an aspect of society more generally? 
What role do editorial interests and preferences play? The 
data we have provided, in other words, open up many poten-
tially fruitful avenues for investigation.
Finally, we believe this paper makes a contribution in 
having shone a new kind of light upon the scholarly field 
of business ethics. To the best of our knowledge, this study 
represents the first time that a “big-data” approach has been 
taken to understanding the shape of the field. Our approach 
represents a new kind of analysis, one that for the first 
9
See Citizens United v. Federal Election Com’n, 130 S. Ct. 876, 
558 U.S. 310, 175 L. Ed. 2d 753 (2010) and Burwell v. Hobby Lobby 
Stores, Inc., 134 S. Ct. 2751, 573 U.S., 189 L. Ed. 2d 675 (2014), 
respectively.
A Big-Data Approach to Understanding the Thematic Landscape of the Field of Business Ethics,…
1 3
time ever provides a comprehensive examination of schol-
arly trends in the field, an examination that is largely free 
from reliance on human intuition and biases. Similar work 
could be done on what has been discussed in the realm of 
practice—for example, examining ethics-related topics in 
the business press and in organizations’ annual reports. As 
noted above, this method naturally has its limitations. But 
it is an exciting development, too. Our analysis represents 
an attempt to analyze the field of business ethics by utiliz-
ing sophisticated computerized methods. This means finally 
subjecting the scholarly literature in this field to a set of 
methods that are as sophisticated and complex as the field 
itself.
Acknowledgements We are grateful to Professor Laura Hartman, the 
Director of Susilo Institute for Ethics in the Global Economy at Ques-
trom School of Business, Boston University, for her insightful com-
ments and suggestions along the development of this study.
Compliance with Ethical Standards 
Conflict of interest The author declares that there is no conflict of in-
terest.
Ethical Approval This article does not contain any studies with human 
participants or animals performed by any of the authors.
Appendices
Appendix 1: Latent Dirichlet Allocation
We chose the latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei et al. 
2003) model as our probabilistic topic modeling method. 
As the first and the most mature topic model, LDA has 
emerged as a powerful and commonly used technique to 
reveal thematic information from digital archives (Griffiths 
and Steyvers 2004). Recently, it has received growing atten-
tion in various areas of management research, especially in 
the study of the historical evolution of ideas. For instance, 
recent work by Kaplan and Vakili (2015) mined topics in a 
body of knowledge concerning patents; Wang et al. (2015) 
employed topic modeling to conduct a historical review of 
research on consumer behavior; and Chen and Zhao (2015) 
used topic modeling to study the field of information sys-
tems. All of these studies used LDA.
An example will help convey the intuition behind LDA. 
Figure 7 is the abstract of “Ethical leadership behavior and 
employee justice perceptions: the mediating role of trust in 
organizations”—a research paper by Xu et al. (2016). Sup-
pose a dedicated scholar read through every published JBE 
article and learned all the coherent topics in them. Upon 
reading the article in Fig. 7, she may identify that three of 
the topics are addressed here. We highlight these three topics 
in different colors: blue indicates the topic “ethical leader-
ship”; green indicates the topic “employee ethical behav-
iors”; and yellow indicates the topic “virtue ethics.” The 
scholar can also decide the weights Xu et al. put on the three 
topics in the article. If the three topics are addressed equally 
in the article, she may annotate (“ethical leadership” = 0.33, 
“employee ethical behaviors” = 0.33, and “virtue eth-
ics” = 0.34, where all weights must add up to 1.0).
The sheer volume of articles makes human understand-
ing, organizing, and annotating of the entire JBE archive 
a daunting—if not impossible—task. We use LDA to con-
duct the above analysis automatically. LDA builds upon the 
intuition that articles often exhibit multiple topics, and these 
topics are expressed using different words.
10
LDA uses a 
probabilistic model and random variables to express the 
relationship between documents, topics, and words. The 
model inference process matches the probabilistic model 
with the observed JBE archive and provides the outputs we 
presented in the paper. Next, we introduce the assumptions 
behind LDA and inference process.
As with all other machine learning models, LDA starts 
with several statistical assumptions. First, an article is a “bag 
of words,” meaning that LDA ignores the order of words in 
an article. The order of the words is, of course, important 
for readers to understand an article. However, as Blei et al. 
(2003) have argued, this simplification (i.e., ignoring word 
order) can result in enhanced computational efficiency while 
largely preserving the semantic themes in the article. Sec-
ond, LDA assumes that all articles in the archive share the 
same set of topics, but the topic proportions differ across 
articles (from 0 to 100% for any given topic). This assump-
tion is based on the fact that all JBE authors share a body 
of knowledge, while different authors are experts in various 
sub-domains. As such, their articles will have different foci. 
Third, LDA assumes that each topic is manifested in the 
form of a cluster of topic-related keywords. These topic-
related keywords are from fixed vocabulary of the totality 
of the article archive. Fourth, LDA assumes that the set of 
Fig. 7 
Topics and associated words in a document
10
The same phrase is allowed to be used in multiple topics, although 
the weight might be different.
Y. Liu et al.
1 3
words contained in any given article is a combination of 
topic-related words from a variety of topics. The third and 
fourth assumptions lead to the generative process of LDA.
LDA is a generative model. The model assumes that the 
observed JBE articles are generated from a probabilistic pro-
cess characterized by hidden (latent) random variables. The 
random variables are hidden from us, but all of the authors 
know about them. For our purpose, we focus on two sets of 
hidden random variables. The first is the per-document topic 
distribution. The parameters of this distribution could tell us, 
for each article, the likely weights of each topic. The second 
is the per-topic word distribution, the parameters of which 
could indicate the most likely words under each topic.
11
With the two hidden distributions, LDA assumes that the 
procedure of writing a JBE article (i.e., generating the bag 
of words in the article) follows two main steps:
1. 
The authors pick the weight distribution of the topics for 
each article according to the per-document topic distri-
bution. For example, 80% about CSR and 20% supply 
chain-related issues.
2. 
The authors choose the corresponding bag of words 
according to how words are related to topics (the per-
topic word distribution). For example, use the word 
“social” 20 times, “stakeholder” 10 times, “contract” 5 
times, “retailer” 3 times.
Given the collection of the JBE articles, which are the 
observable outcomes of the above generative process, our 
goal of the analysis is to uncover the per-document topic dis-
tribution and the per-topic word distribution. The inference 
algorithm of LDA reverses the above generative process 
using hierarchical Bayesian inference (Blei 2012). In other 
words, the algorithm tries to answer: assuming all the arti-
cles are indeed generated according to the above two steps, 
what are the most plausible document-topic distribution 
and topic-word distribution that gave rise to the observed 
JBE articles? The inference process gave us the results pre-
sented in the paper, namely (1) which topic(s) are covered in 
a given article and their proportions, and (2) the representa-
tive words for each topic.
Lastly, we describe our implementation details. We first 
downloaded our data from JSTOR Data for Research (dfr.
jstor.org). We used gensism (Rehurek and Sojka 2010), 
an open-source natural language processing package for 
Python, for preprocessing and LDA inference. In the pre-
processing stage, we used lemmatization to remove the 
inflectional endings of words. We excluded the most com-
mon (top 50), rare (less than 10 occurrences), and stop-
words following the convention. The most common words 
are words that are generic terms such as business, ethic, 
study, research, while the rare words are usually study spe-
cific. Neither can help us learn the pervading themes in the 
articles. We then identified the most frequent bigrams and 
trigrams (two- and three-word terms) and concatenated them 
to words. In the LDA inference stage, gensism implements 
the online variational Bayes algorithm outlined in Bach et 
al. (2010). We chose the number of topics K = 18 using 
the perplexity measure, which is commonly used to evalu-
ate a language model’s performance (Asuncion et al. 2009). 
In addition, the solution presented agrees with our human 
judgment in terms of semantic coherence and interpretation.
Appendix 2. Gini Coefficients
To analyze topic diversity, we utilize the way of calculat-
ing Gini coefficient—a measure usually used for income 
inequality (Gini 1909). In our analysis, the Gini coefficient 
is instead used to measure the inequality of the weight across 
the multiple topics examined by LDA model in a paper. The 
value of the Gini coefficient varies between “0” and “1”. The 
Gini coefficient “0” indicates complete equality, meaning 
the weight of each topic identified by the LDA model is the 
same. In this case, the diversity is high because all the topics 
are discussed with the same amount of scholarly attention 
(extremely spread). The Gini coefficient “1” indicates com-
plete inequality, meaning that only one topic is discussed or 
gains all the scholarly attention (extremely concentrated). In 
this case, the diversity is low. Therefore, there is a negative 
relationship between the Gini coefficient and diversity. To 
make our analyses and results more intuitive, we transform 
Gini coefficient to the value of diversity by multiplying the 
initial Gini coefficient with “− 1”.
11
Both are Dirichlet distributions—hence the name of LDA. We 
can think of a Dirichlet distribution as an urn containing many multi-
faced dice. Each die in the urn is different in terms of the probability 
of its each face showing up in a roll. For the per-document topic dis-
tribution, the number of faces is the number of topics. For the per-
topic word distribution, the number of faces is the total number of 
words.
A Big-Data Approach to Understanding the Thematic Landscape of the Field of Business Ethics,…
1 3
Appendix 3. Representative Articles Under Each Topic
Topic
Article title
Authors
Vol.
Iss.
Year
Virtue ethics
How virtue fits within business ethics
J. T. Whetstone
33
2
2001
Virtue theory as a dynamic theory of business
S. Arjoon
28
2
2000
Integrating personalism into virtue-based business ethics: the 
personalist and the common good principles
D. Mele
88
1
2009
Aristotelian virtue and business ethics education
S. M. Mintz
15
8
1996
The language of managerial excellence: virtues as understood and 
applied
J. T. Whetstone
44
4
2003
Employee ethical 
behaviors
Organizational dissidence: the case of whistle-blowing
J. P. Near, M. P. Miceli
4
1
1985
A behavioral model of ethical and unethical decision making
M. Bommer, C. Gratto, J. Gravander, 
M. Tuttle
6
4
1987
An integrative model for understanding and managing ethical 
behavior in business organizations
W. E. Stead, D. L. Worrell, J. G. Stead
9
3
1990
The challenge of ethical behavior in organizations
R. R. Sims
11
7
1992
Organizational ethics: a stacked deck
H. R. Smith, A. B. Carroll
3
2
1984
Consumer ethics
Consumers’ ethical beliefs: the roles of money, religiosity and 
attitude toward business
S. J. Vitell, J. J. Singh, J. Paolillo
73
4
2007
Marketing dataveillance and digital privacy: using theories of 
justice to understand consumers’ online privacy concerns
L. Ashworth, C. Free
67
2
2006
Exploring the structure of ethical attributions as a component 
of the consumer decision model: the vicarious versus personal 
perspective
J. Whalen, R. E. Pitts, J. K. Wong
10
4
1991
Relational consequences of perceived deception in online shop-
ping: the moderating roles of type of product, consumer’s 
attitude toward the internet and consumer’s demographics
S. Roman
95
3
2010
The end of religion? Examining the role of religiousness, 
materialism, and long-term orientation on consumer ethics in 
Indonesia
A. Denni, T. Fandy
123
3
2014
Corporate social 
responsibility
Corporate social responsibility theories: mapping the territory
E. Garriga, D. Mele
53
2
2004
Concepts and definitions of CSR and corporate sustainability: 
between agency and communion
M. van Marrewijk
44
3
2003
Corporate social responsibility and resource-based perspectives
M. C. Branco, L. L. Rodrigues
69
2
2006
Corporate social responsibility (CSR): theory and practice in a 
developing country context
D. Jamali, R. Mirshak
72
3
2007
Measuring corporate social responsibility: a scale development 
study
D. Turker
85
4
2009
Gender
Gender-based barriers to senior management positions: under-
standing the scarcity of female CEOs
J. G. Oakley
27
4
2000
Managers, values, and executive decisions: an exploration of the 
role of gender, career stage, organizational level, function, and 
the importance of ethics, relationships and results in managerial 
decision-making
J. H. Barnett, M. J. Karson
8
10
1989
Gender differences in managerial careers: yesterday, today, and 
tomorrow
C. Kirchmeyer
37
1
2002
Mentoring in organizations: implications for women
R. J. Burke, C. A. McKeen
9
5
1990
Gender and ethical orientation: a test of gender and occupational 
socialization theories
E. S. Mason, P. E. Mudrack
15
6
1996
Y. Liu et al.
1 3
Topic
Article title
Authors
Vol.
Iss.
Year
Accounting 
ethics
Legislated ethics: from Enron to Sarbanes–Oxley, the impact on 
corporate America
H. Rockness, J. Rockness
57
1
2005
Historical perspectives: development of the codes of ethics in the 
legal, medical and accounting professions
J. F. Backof, C. L. Martin, Jr.
10
2
1991
Beyond bean counting: establishing high ethical standards in the 
public accounting profession
J. R. Cohen, L. W. Pant
10
1
1991
Reactions to ethical dilemmas: a study pertaining to certified 
public accountants
G. A. Claypool, D. F. Fetyko, M. A. 
Pearson
9
9
1990
Cultural and socioeconomic constraints on international codes of 
ethics: lessons from accounting
J. R. Cohen, L. W. Pant, D. J. Sharp
11
9
1992
Marketing ethics
Children and the changing world of advertising
E. S. Moore
52
2
2004
Persuasive advertising, autonomy, and the creation of desire
R. Crisp
6
5
1987
The ethics of psychoactive ads
M. R. Hyman, R. Tansey
9
2
1990
Ethical dimensions of advertising executions
I. D. Nebenzahl, E. D. Jaffe
17
7
1998
Advertising and behavior control
R. L. Arrington
1
1
1982
Ethical decision 
making
Ethical decision making: a review of the empirical literature
R. C. Ford, W. D. Richardson
13
3
1994
A review of the empirical ethical decision-making literature: 
1996–2003
M. J. O’Fallon, K. D. Butterfield
59
4
2005
A review of empirical studies assessing ethical decision making 
in business
T. W. Loe, L. Ferrell, P. Mansfield
25
3
2000
The effects of culture on ethical decision-making: an application 
of Hofstede’s typology
S. J. Vitell, S. L. Nwachukwu, J. H. 
Barnes
12
10
1993
Judging the morality of business practices: the influence of per-
sonal moral philosophies
D. R. Forsyth
11
6
1992
Ethics education
Concerns of college students regarding business ethics
R. F. Beltramini, R. A. Peterson, G. 
Kozmetsky
3
3
1984
Ethics, CSR, and sustainability education in the “financial times” 
top 50 global business schools: baseline data and future research 
directions
L. J. Christensen, E. Peirce, L. P. Hart-
man, W. M. Hoffman, J. Carrier
73
4
2007
Measuring the impact of teaching ethics to future managers: a 
review, assessment, and recommendations
J. Weber
9
3
1990
Do company ethics training programs make a difference? An 
empirical analysis
J. T. Delaney, D. Sockell
11
9
1992
Designing and delivering business ethics teaching and learning
R. R. Sims, E. L. Felton, Jr.
63
3
2006
Corporate per-
sonhood
The concept of corporate responsibility
K. E. Goodpaster
2
1
1983
Self-interest and business ethics: some lessons of the recent 
corporate scandals
T. L. Carson
43
4
2003
Corporate Environmental Responsibility
J. DesJardins
17
8
1998
A critical perspective of integrative social contracts theory: recur-
ring criticisms and next generation research topics
T. W. Dunfee
68
3
2006
A social contract account for CSR as an extended model of corpo-
rate governance (i): rational bargaining and justification
L. Sacconi
68
3
2006
International 
development
Public policies on corporate social responsibility: the role of 
governments in Europe
L. Albareda, J. M. Lozano, T. Ysa
74
4
2007
The global compact selected experiences and reflections
G. Kell
59
2
2005
Child labor and multinational conduct: a comparison of interna-
tional business and stakeholder codes
A. Kolk, R. van Tulder
36
3
2002
Corporate social responsibility for developing country multina-
tional corporations: Lost war in pertaining global competitive-
ness?
P. Gugler, J. Y. J. Shi
87
S1
2009
Corporate governance and institutional transparency in emerging 
markets
C. C. J. M. Millar, T. I. Eldomiaty, C. 
J. Choi, B. Hilton
59
2
2005
A Big-Data Approach to Understanding the Thematic Landscape of the Field of Business Ethics,…
1 3
Topic
Article title
Authors
Vol.
Iss.
Year
Qualitative case 
studies
Ethical attitudes of students and business professionals: a study of 
moral reasoning
J. A. Wood, J. G. Longenecker, J. A. 
McKinney, C. W. Moore
7
4
1988
A comparison of five business philosophies
P. Miesing, J. F. Preble
4
6
1985
Student perceptions of ‘job politics’ as practised by those climb-
ing the corporate career ladder
M. M. Pressley, D. E. Blevins
3
2
1984
Plane truth: a qualitative study of employee dishonesty in the 
airline industry
E. D. Scott
42
4
2003
Real estate sales agents and the code of ethics: a voice stress 
analysis
D. E. Allmon, J. Grant
9
10
1990
Managerial 
morality
Everyday moral issues experienced by managers
J. A. Waters, F. Bird, P. D. Chant
5
5
1986
The ethics of insider trading
P. H. Werhane
8
11
1989
What is really unethical about insider trading?
J. Moore
9
3
1990
The nature of managerial moral standards
F. Bird, J. A. Waters
6
1
1987
Predictors of ethical decisions regarding insider trading
D. E. Terpstra, M. G. C. Reyes, D. W. 
Bokor
10
9
1991
Doing well by 
doing good
The relationship between corporate social performance, and 
organizational size, financial performance, and environmental 
performance: an empirical examination
P. A. Stanwick, S. D. Stanwick
17
2
1998
An empirical investigation of the relationship between change 
in corporate social performance and financial performance: a 
stakeholder theory perspective
B. M. Ruf, K. Muralidhar, R. M. 
Brown, J. J. Janney, K. Paul
32
2
2001
The association between corporate social-responsibility and finan-
cial performance: the paradox of social cost
M. L. Pava, J. Krausz
15
3
1996
The link between corporate social and financial performance: 
evidence from the banking industry
W. G. Simpson, T. Kohers
35
2
2002
Corporate social and financial performance: an investigation in 
the UK supermarket industry
G. Moore
34
4
2001
Ethical leader-
ship
Toward an understanding of ethical climate: Its relationship to 
ethical behavior and supervisory influence
J. C. Wimbush, J. M. Shepard
13
8
1994
Leaders, values, and organizational climate: examining leadership 
strategies for establishing an organizational climate regarding 
ethics
M. W. Grojean, C. J. Resick, M. W. 
Dickson, D. B. Smith
55
3
2004
The virtuous influence of ethical leadership behavior: evidence 
from the field
M. J. Neubert, D. S. Carlson, K. M. 
Kacmar, J. A. Roberts, L. B. Chonko
90
2
2009
A cross-cultural examination of the endorsement of ethical leader-
ship
C. J. Resick, P. J. Hanges, M. W. Dick-
son, J. K. Mitchelson
63
4
2006
Perceived integrity of transformational leaders in organisational 
settings
K. W. Parry, S. B. Proctor-Thomson
35
2
2002
Fair trade and 
labor
The fair trade movement: parameters, issues and future research
G. Moore
53
2
2004
Impacts of corporate code of conduct on labor standards: a case 
study of Reebok’s athletic footwear supplier factory in China
X. Yu
81
3
2008
Fair trade: three key challenges for reaching the mainstream
A. Hira, J. Ferrie
63
2
2006
What do corporations have to do with fair trade? Positive and 
normative analysis from a value chain perspective
D. Reed
86
S1
2009
Embedding CSR values: the global footwear industry’s evolving 
governance structure
S. Lim, J. Phillips
81
1
2008
Corporate gov-
ernance
The ethics of leveraged management buyouts revisited
T. M. Jones, R. O. Hunt, III
10
11
1991
The curious case of corporate tax avoidance: Is it socially irre-
sponsible?
G. R. Dowling
124
1
2013
Moral ethics v. tax ethics: the case of transfer pricing among 
multinational corporations
D. R. Hansen, R. L. Crosser, D. Laufer
11
9
1992
The limits of shareholder value
P. Koslowski
27
2
2000
The ethics of going private
D. A. Houston, J. S. Howe
6
7
1987
Y. Liu et al.
1 3
Topic
Article title
Authors
Vol.
Iss.
Year
National culture
The impact of national culture on software piracy
B. W. Husted
26
3
2000
The morality of software piracy: a cross-cultural analysis
W. R. Swinyard, H. Rinne, A. K. Kau
9
8
1990
Perceptions of country corruption: antecedents and outcomes
J. H. Davis, J. A. Ruhe
43
4
2003
Determinants of bribery in international business: the cultural and 
economic factors
R. Sanyal
59
2
2005
Attitudes towards business ethics: a five nation comparative study
R. L. Sims, A. E. Gegez
50
3
2004
Appendix 4: Topical Trend of Journal of Business Ethics and Business Ethics Quarterly
See Fig. 8.
Fig. 8 
Comparing topic com-
positions of Journal of Business 
Ethics and Business Ethics 
Quarterly
A Big-Data Approach to Understanding the Thematic Landscape of the Field of Business Ethics,…
1 3
References
Albrecht, C., Thompson, J. A., Hoopes, J. L., & Rodrigo, P. (2010). 
Business ethics journal rankings as perceived by business ethics 
scholars. Journal of Business Ethics, 95(2), 227–237.
Arnold, D. G., Goodpaster, K. E., & Weaver, G. R. (2015). Past trends 
and future directions in business ethics and corporate responsibil-
ity scholarship. Business Ethics Quarterly, 25(4), v–xv.
Asuncion, A., Welling, M., Smyth, P., & Teh, Y. W. (2009, June). 
On smoothing and inference for topic models. In Proceedings of 
the 25th conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence (pp. 
27–34). AUAI Press.
Bach, F. R., Hoffman, M. D., & Blei, D. M. (2010). Online learning 
for latent dirichlet allocation. Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems, 23, 856–864.
Blei, D. M. (2012). Probabilistic topic models. Communications of the 
ACM, 55(4), 77–84.
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet alloca-
tion. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3, 993–1022.
Bloomberg Businessweek. (2012). How is the intellectual capital score 
determined? Retrieved from http://www.bloom 
berg.com/bw/artic 
les/2012-03-19/faq-full-time-mba-ranki 
ngs#p2. Accessed 20 Jan 
2016.
Calabretta, G., Durisin, B., & Ogliengo, M. (2011). Uncovering the 
intellectual structure of research in business ethics: A journey 
through the history, the classics, and the pillars of journal of busi-
ness ethics. Journal of Business Ethics, 104, 499–524.
Chadegani, A. A., Salehi, H., Yunus, M. M., Farhadi, H., Fooladi, 
M., Farhadi, M., et al. (2013). A comparison between two main 
academic literature collections: Web of science and scopus data-
bases. Asian Social Science, 9(5), 18–26. https 
://doi.org/10.5539/
ass.v9n5p 18.
Chen, H., & Zhao, J. L. (2015). ISTopic: Understanding information 
systems research through topic models. Retrieved from http://ssrn.
com/abstr act=26017 19 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.26017 
19. Accessed 5 Mar 2016.
Collins, D. (2000). The quest to improve the human condition: The first 
1500 articles published in journal of business ethics. Journal of 
Business Ethics, 26, 1–73.
Craft, J. (2013). A review of the empirical ethical decision-making 
literature: 2004–2011. Journal of Business Ethics, 117, 221–259.
Culnan, M. J. (1987). Mapping the intellectual structure of MIS, 1980–
1985: a co-citation analysis. Management of Information System 
Quarterly, 11(3), 341–353.
Ford, R. C., & Richardson, W. D. (1994). Ethical decision making: 
A review of the empirical literature. Journal of Business Ethics, 
13(3), 205–221.
Gaski, J. (1999). Does marketing ethics really have anything to say?—
A critical inventory of the literature. Journal of Business Ethics, 
18(3), 315–334.
Gautier, A., & Pache, A. (2015). Research on corporate philanthropy: A 
review and assessment. Journal of Business Ethics, 126, 343–369.
Gini, C. (1909). Concentration and dependency ratios (in Italian). 
English translation in Rivista di Politica Economica, 87(1997), 
769–789.
Griffin, J. J., & Mahon, J. F. (1997). The corporate social performance 
and corporate financial performance debate twenty-five years of 
incomparable research. Business and Society, 36(1), 5–31.
Griffiths, T. L., & Steyvers, M. (2004). Finding scientific topics. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Science, 101, 5228–5235.
Kaplan, S., & Vakili, K. (2015). The double-edged sword of recombi-
nation in breakthrough innovation. Strategic Management Jour-
nal, 36, 1435–1457.
Lehnert, K., Park, Y., & Singh, N. (2015). Research note & update 
on J. L. craft review of the empirical ethical decision making 
literature—Boundary conditions & extensions. Journal of Busi-
ness Ethics, 129(1), 195–219.
Liket, K., & Simaens, A. (2015). Battling the devolution in the research 
on corporate philanthropy. Journal of Business Ethics, 126, 
285–308.
Lock, I., & Seele, P. (2015). Quantitative content analysis as a method 
for business ethics research. Business Ethics: A European Review, 
24(S1), S24–S40.
Loe, T., Ferrell, L., & Mansfield, P. (2000). A review of empirical 
studies assessing ethical decision making in business. Journal of 
Business Ethics, 25, 185–204.
Ma, Z. (2009). The status of contemporary business ethics research: 
present and future. Journal of Business Ethics, 90, 255–265.
Ma, Z., Liang, D., Yu, K., & Lee, Y. (2012). Most cited business ethics 
publications: Mapping the intellectual structure of business eth-
ics studies in 2001–2008. Business Ethics: A European Review, 
21(3), 286–297.
Malik, M. (2015). Value-enhancing capabilities of CSR: a brief review 
of contemporary literature. Journal of Business Ethics, 127, 
419–438.
Margolis, J. D., & Walsh, J. P. (2003). Misery loves companies: 
Rethinking social initiatives by business. Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 48(2), 268–305.
McWilliams, A., & Siegel, D. (2000). Corporate social responsibil-
ity and financial performance: Correlation or misspecification? 
Strategic Management Journal, 21, 603–609.
Michalos, A. C., & Poff, D. C. (2013). Introduction. In A. C. Michalos 
& D. C. Poff (eds), Citation Classics from the Journal of Busi-
ness Ethics, Advances in Business Ethics Research 2. https 
://doi.
org/10.1007/978-94-007-4126-3_1.
O’Fallon, M., & Butterfield, K. (2005). A review of the empirical ethi-
cal decision-making literature: 1996-2003. Journal of Business 
Ethics, 59(4), 375–413.
Paul, K. (2004). Business and society and business ethics journals: 
A citation and impact analysis. Journal of Scholarly publishing, 
35(2), 103–117.
Rehurek, R., & Sojka, P. (2010). Software framework for topic model-
ling with large corpora. In Proceedings of the LREC 2010 work-
shop on new challenges for NLP frameworks.
Robertson, D. C. (1993). Empiricism in business ethics: Suggested 
research directions. Journal of Business Ethics, 12(8), 585–599.
Sabrin, M. (2002). A ranking of the most productive business ethics 
scholars: A five-year study. Journal of Business Ethics, 36(4), 
355–379.
Tahai, A., & Meyer, M. J. (1999). A revealed preference study of man-
agement journals’ direct influences. Strategic Management Jour-
nal, 20(3), 279–296.
Taneja, S. S., Taneja, P. K., & Gupta, R. K. (2011). Researches in cor-
porate social responsibility: A review of shifting focus, paradigms, 
and methodologies. Journal of Business Ethics, 101(3), 343–364.
Tenbrunsel, A. E., & Smith-Crowe, K. (2008). Ethical decision mak-
ing: Where we’ve been and where we’re going. Academy of Man-
agement Annals, 2, 545–607.
Thomson Reuters. (2014). Web of science—Core collection. Retrieved 
from http://thoms onreu ters.com/conte nt/dam/openw eb/docum 
ents/pdf/schol arly-scien tific -resea rch/fact-sheet /web-of-scien ce-
core-colle ction 
.pdf.
Tsalikis, J., & Fritzsche, D. (1989). Business ethics: A literature review 
with a focus on marketing ethics. Journal of Business Ethics, 8(9), 
695–743.
Tseng, H. C., Duan, C. H., Tung, H. L., & Kung, H. J. (2010). Modern 
business ethics research: Concepts, theories, and relationships. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 91(4), 587–597.
Van Beurden, P., & Gössling, T. (2008). The worth of values—A litera-
ture review on the relation between corporate social and financial 
performance. Journal of Business Ethics, 82(2), 407–424.
Y. Liu et al.
1 3
Van Noorden, R. (2015). Interdisciplinary research by the numbers, 
an analysis reveals the extent and impact of research that bridges 
disciplines. Nature, 525, 306–307.
Vieira, E. S., & Gomes, J. A. N. F. (2009). A comparison of Scopus 
and web of science for a typical university. Scientometrics, 81(2), 
587–600. https 
://doi.org/10.1007/s1119 2-009-2178-0.
Vitell, S. J. (2003). Consumer ethics research: Review, synthesis and 
suggestions for the future. Journal of Business Ethics, 43(1/2), 
33–47.
Wang, X., Bendle, N. T., Mai, F., & Cotte, J. (2015). The journal of 
consumer research at 40: A historical analysis. Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 42, 5–8.
Warnick, B. J., Rodrigo, P., Albrecht, C. O., & Stephens, N. M. 
(2014). Individual scholar productivity rankings in business eth-
ics research. Innovar, 24(54), 183–198.
Wicks, A. C., & Derry, R. (1996). An evaluation of journal quality: 
The perspective of business ethics researchers. Business Ethics 
Quarterly, 6(3), 359–371.
Xu, A. J., Loi, R., & Ngo, H. J. (2016). Ethical leadership behavior 
and employee justice perceptions: The mediating role of trust in 
organization. Journal of Business Ethics, 134(3), 493–504. https 
:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s1055 
1-014-2457-4.
