A Text Similarity Approach for
Automated Transposition Detection of
European Union Directives
Rohan NANDA
a
,
1
, Luigi DI CARO
a
and Guido BOELLA
a
a
Department of Computer Science, University of Turin, Italy
Abstract.
This paper investigates the application of text similarity techniques to
automatically detect the transposition of European Union (EU) directives into the
national law. Currently, the European Commission (EC) resorts to time consuming
and expensive manual methods like conformity checking studies and legal analy-
sis for identifying national transposition measures. We utilize both lexical and se-
mantic similarity techniques and supplement them with knowledge from EuroVoc
to identify transpositions. We then evaluate our approach by comparing the results
with the correlation tables (gold standard). Our results indicate that both similarity
techniques proved to be effective in detecting transpositions. Such systems could
be used to identify the transposed provisions by both EC and legal professionals.
Keywords. transposition, text similarity,
EU legislation
1.
Introduction
The effective transposition of European Union (EU) directives at the national level is im-
portant to achieve the objectives of the Treaties and smooth functioning of the EU. Mem-
ber States are responsible for the correct and timely implementation of directives. The
European Commission (EC) is responsible for monitoring the national implementations
to ensure their compliance with EU law. The transposition measures adopted by Member
States in national legislation to achieve the objectives of the directive are known as na-
tional implementing measures (NIMs) [4]. The Commission monitors the NIMs (com-
municated by the Member States) to ensure that Member States have taken appropriate
measures to achieve the objectives of the directive. The steps taken by the Commission
to monitor NIMs include Conformity Checking and Correlation tables [7]. The Commis-
sion outsources the monitoring of NIMs to subcontractors and legal consulting firms [1].
The conformity check studies carried out by a team of competent legal experts, comprise
legal analysis and concordance tables. The concordance tables identify the specific pro-
visions of NIMs which implement a particular article of the directive. Correlation tables
are prepared by the Member States to ensure that the directive is completely transposed.
They identify the specific provisions of NIMs for each article of a directive in a tabular
format. Correlation tables are generally not available to public as they are sent by Mem-
1
Corresponding Author
ber States to the Commission as part of a confidential bilateral exchange.
There is no
agreed format or compulsory content for correlation tables [7].
These legal
measures undertaken by the Commission to monitor NIMs are time-
consuming and expensive [3]. For instance, to make a concordance table lawyers need to
read several NIMs for each directive and then understand which provision of a particular
NIM implements a particular article of the directive. This becomes more cumbersome for
the Commission and lawyers doing cross-border or comparative legal research. There-
fore, there is a need for a technological approach which utilizes text mining and natural
language processing (NLP) techniques, to assist the Commission and legal professionals
in studying and evaluating the transposition of directives at the national level.
This paper presents the first work in automated transposition detection of EU di-
rectives. The objective is to identify the specific provisions of NIMs which transpose a
particular article of the directive. We study and compare the results from both lexical and
semantic similarity techniques on five directives and their corresponding NIMs by eval-
uating them with a gold standard (correlation tables). We were restricted to study only
five directives as we could find correlation tables for only certain NIMs in English (due
to our lack of competency in other EU languages).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
In the next section,
we discuss the
proposed approach for automated transposition detection of EU directives.
Section 3
discusses the results and analysis. Section 4 presents the conclusion and future work.
2.
Automated Transposition Detection of EU Directives
In this section,
we describe our approach for automated transposition detection of EU
directives (Figure 1). We utilized cosine similarity vector model (lexical similarity tech-
nique) to detect transposing provisions with similar words. Latent semantic analysis (se-
mantic similarity technique) was chosen to detect transposing provisions with same se-
mantics but different wordings. First of all, each group of directive and NIMs were stored
in a format to adhere to the structure of their particular correlation table. This enabled us
to compare our results with that of the correlation tables. From here on the term provision
refers to both article (of Directive) and provision (of NIM). Preprocessing included re-
moving punctuation, conversion to lowercase and tokenization. Further stop words were
removed using NLTKs corpus of stopwords for English.
NLTKs part-of-speech tagger
(POS tagger) was used to filter out nouns, verbs and adjectives from the remaining set
of tokens [2]. The tokens obtained after pre-processing were enriched with the knowl-
edge from EuroVoc
2
, a multilingual thesaurus of the European Union. The tokens in the
corpus were enriched with synonym and near-synonym terms as per equivalence rela-
tionship of EuroVoc [8].
Afterwards,
the set of new tokens are stemmed to reduce the
inflectional forms of words. Each provision of the corpus is then represented in a bag-of-
words format. It is a list of each token and its count in a particular provision. Further, we
applied Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (tf-idf) weighting scheme to all
the provisions [10]. We implemented latent semantic analysis (LSA) by applying Singu-
lar Value Decomposition (SVD) to the tf-idf provision-token matrix. SVD decomposes
the tf-idf matrix into separate matrices which capture the similarity between tokens and
provisions across different dimensions in space [6].
2
http://eurovoc.europa.eu/drupal/?q=abouteurovoc
Figure 1.
System architecture for automated transposition detection
The query (specific article of directive) is also transformed through the above steps.
Since we wanted to evaluate the influence of adding knowledge from EuroVoc and also
compare the performance of cosine similarity (CS) and LSA, we carried out the evalua-
tion into four cases : (i) Cosine similarity (CS), (ii) Cosine similarity with EuroVoc, (iii)
Latent semantic analysis (LSA), (iv) Latent semantic analysis with EuroVoc. It is impor-
tant to note that dotted block of EuroVoc in Figure 1 is considered only for case (ii) and
(iv). Similarly, the dotted block of SVD is considered only for case (iii) and (iv). For case
(i) and (ii), cosine similarity is calculated as cosine of the angle between the transformed
query vector (in tf-idf representation) and each provision vector in the corpus (also in
tf-idf representation). The matching NIM provisions with similarity values greater than
or equal to the threshold value are retrieved by the system. Similarly, for case (iii) and
(iv), the similarity is measured as the cosine of the angle between the query vector and
each provision vector in the reduced-dimensional space.
3.
Results and Analysis
In this section, we study the results of transposition detection of five directives using the
techniques discussed in the previous section. Table 1 represents the directives and NIMs
under consideration.
Directive1,
Directive2,
Directive3 and Directive4 are each trans-
posed by one NIM. Directive5 is transposed by four NIMs. We observed that there were
many cases where a particular article of a directive is transposed by multiple provisions
of a NIM. Therefore, we also considered the cases where the provisions retrieved by our
system are a subset of the transposed provisions as per the correlation tables. These are
referred to as partial matches. We evaluate our system for both exact and partial matches.
The implementation was carried out in Python and utilized NLTK and Gensim libraries
[9][2].
We evaluate our system by computing the metrics:
Precision,
Recall
and F-score
(harmonic mean of
precision and recall)
for
both exact
and partial
matches (partial
matches are considered correct while computing precision and recall). We did not con-
Table 1.
Directives and NIMs under consideration
Directive-NIM group
Directives (CELEX number)
NIMs (Country and Number)
(Directive1, NIM1)
32011L0085
Ireland (Statutory Instrument No. 508/2013)
(Directive2, NIM2)
32001L0024
Ireland (Statutory Instrument No. 198/2004)
(Directive3, NIM3)
31999L0092
United Kingdom (Statutory Instrument No. 2776 of 7/11/2002)
(Directive4, NIM4)
32003L0010
United
Kingdom (Statutory
Instrument
No.
1643
of
28/06/2005)
(Directive5,
NIM5,
NIM6,
NIM7, NIM8)
31998L0024
United Kingdom (Statutory Instrument No. 2677 of 24/10/2002)
United Kingdom (Statutory Instrument No. 2676 of 24/10/2002)
United Kingdom (Statutory Instrument No. 2675 of 24/10/2002)
United Kingdom (Statutory Instrument No. 2776 of 07/11/2002)
sider accuracy as we have very different
number of true positives and true negatives
resulting in an unbalanced dataset.
We model and evaluate the system by considering
the four cases for both partial and exact matches as mentioned in the previous section.
Figure 2 shows the results of the transposition detection of all five directives. Appropri-
ate threshold levels for transposition detection for both CS and LSA were determined
through experimentation on the dataset.
The results in Figure 2 indicate no clear winner in terms of performance. However,
we do make a few interesting observations.
In terms of F-Score,
CS achieves the best
performance across all 5 directives. The performance of LSA was similar to CS in Direc-
tive1 and Directive2. However, it was outperformed by CS in Directive3, Directive4 and
Directive5. This is because, LSA has been shown to perform well when a large corpus
is available to extract the latent relationships between different terms with same mean-
ing in different documents. LSA needs a large corpus to derive the semantics of a word
by analyzing its relationship with other words [5]. In a small corpus (like in our case),
there is not enough text to extract the relationships between different words.
Also the
application of SVD causes some important
features (needed for text
similarity) to be
lost, which results in higher false negatives (system is unable to detect the transposition,
even though its present). This results in LSA systems achieving lower recall as compared
to CS systems (as recall depends on false negatives). The same is observed through the
graphs of Figure 2. In Directive3, Directive 4 and Directive 5 the recall of LSA is always
lower than CS due to these higher false negatives. In Directive1 and Directive2 CS has
the same number of false negatives as LSA resulting in similar recall. The low recall of
LSA systems is compensated by the higher precision due to the trade-off. The precision
values of LSA were equal to or higher than CS in Directive1, Directive2, Directive3 and
Directive5. However, the precision values of CS are quite close to LSA. In majority of the
cases, LSA achieves higher precision (except in Directive4). While CS always achieves
higher recall (except Directive1 and Directive2, where they have same recall). In terms of
F-score, CS outperforms LSA (except Directive1 and Directive2, where they have same
F-score). Overall in terms of all three metrics CS has the best performance due to higher
recall and F-score and decent precision in all the directives.
We also observe from the results that the addition of knowledge from EuroVoc does
not improve the performance of both CS and LSA.
We found that in our corpus there
were several provisions of both directives and NIMs where some terms were enriched
from EuroVoc thesaurus. However, the terms added from EuroVoc to a particular article
of a directive did not match any terms present in the transposing provision and vice versa.
This is why the knowledge from EuroVoc does not help to improve the existing CS and
LSA results.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Precision
Recall 
F-Score
Evaluation Score
Evaluation Metrics
Directive 1: Evaluation of transposition detection with gold standard (Correlation tables)
CS (Exact)
CS with EuroVoc (Exact)
LSA (Exact)
LSA with EuroVoc (Exact)
CS (Partial)
CS with EuroVoc (Partial)
LSA (Partial)
LSA with EuroVoc (Partial)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Precision
Recall 
F-Score
Evaluation Score
Evaluation Metrics
Directive 2: Evaluation of transposition detection with gold standard (Correlation tables)
CS (Exact)
CS with EuroVoc (Exact)
LSA (Exact)
LSA with EuroVoc (Exact)
CS (Partial)
CS with EuroVoc (Partial)
LSA (Partial)
LSA with EuroVoc (Partial)
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Precision
Recall 
F-Score
Evaluation Score
Evaluation Metrics
Directive 3: Evaluation of transposition detection with gold standard (Correlation tables)
CS (Exact)
CS with EuroVoc (Exact)
LSA (Exact)
LSA with EuroVoc (Exact)
CS (Partial)
CS with EuroVoc (Partial)
LSA (Partial)
LSA with EuroVoc (Partial)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Precision
Recall 
F-Score
Evaluation Score
Evaluation Metrics
Directive 4: Evaluation of transposition detection with gold standard (Correlation tables)
CS (Exact)
CS with EuroVoc (Exact)
LSA (Exact)
LSA with EuroVoc (Exact)
CS (Partial)
CS with EuroVoc (Partial)
LSA (Partial)
LSA with EuroVoc (Partial)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Precision
Recall 
F-Score
Evaluation Score
Evaluation Metrics
Directive 5: Evaluation of transposition detection with gold standard (Correlation tables)
CS (Exact)
CS with EuroVoc (Exact)
LSA (Exact)
LSA with EuroVoc (Exact)
CS (Partial)
CS with EuroVoc (Partial)
LSA (Partial)
LSA with EuroVoc (Partial)
Figure 2.
Evaluation of transposition detection with gold standard (Correlation tables)
4.
Conclusion and Future Work
This paper presented the first work in automated transposition detection of EU directives
by the application of text similarity approaches. We identified the need for a technolog-
ical approach for monitoring NIMs. We investigated the application of both lexical (co-
sine similarity) and semantic (latent semantic analysis) similarity techniques in transpo-
sition detection. External knowledge from EuroVoc thesaurus was also used to supple-
ment both similarity techniques.
We evaluated our approach by comparing the results
with the correlation tables. Our results indicate that both cosine similarity and latent se-
mantic analysis were effective in detecting transposition. The overall performance of co-
sine similarity was superior to LSA in terms of F-score. Our initial experiments indicate
that such systems can be useful for legal information retrieval to assist the Commission
and legal professionals.
Our future work will comprise using both n-gram models and
quality phrase extraction to improve upon our current work. We also intend to study the
transposition detection for a particular directive in different Member States. This would
help us to characterize and compare how different Member States transpose the same di-
rective with respect to their legal or domestic policy. We are also interested in developing
a statistical language-independent model for transposition detection of directives across
several Member States.
Acknowledgements
Research presented in this paper is conducted as a PhD research at
the University of
Turin,
within the Erasmus Mundus Joint International Doctoral (Ph.D.) programme in
Law,
Science and Technology.
Luigi Di Caro has received funding from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skodowska-
Curie grant agreement No 690974 for the project ”MIREL: MIning and REasoning with
Legal texts”.
References
[1]
Milieu,
Conformity
checking.
Electronic,
accessed
8
September
2016,
Retrieved
from
http://www.milieu.be/index.php?page=conformity-checking.
[2]
Steven Bird,
Ewan Klein,
and Edward Loper.
Natural language processing with Python.
” O’Reilly
Media, Inc.”, 2009.
[3]
Giuseppe Ciavarini Azzi.
The slow march of european legislation: The implementation of directives.
European integration after Amsterdam: Institutional dynamics and prospects for democracy, pages 52–
67, 2000.
[4]
European Commission.
Monitoring the application of Union law, 2014 Annual Report
[5]
Georgina Cosma and Mike Joy.
An approach to source-code plagiarism detection and investigation
using latent semantic analysis.
IEEE transactions on computers, 61(3):379–394, 2012.
[6]
Susan T Dumais.
Latent
semantic analysis.
Annual
review of
information science and technology,
38(1):188–230, 2004.
[7]
Mariolina Eliantonio Marta Ballesteros, Rostane Mehdi and Damir Petrovic.
Tools for ensuring imple-
mentation and application of eu law and evaluation of their effectiveness, July 2013.
[8]
Luis Polo Paredes, JM Rodrıguez, and Emilio Rubiera Azcona.
Promoting government controlled vo-
cabularies for the semantic web: the eurovoc thesaurus and the cpv product classification system.
Se-
mantic Interoperability in the European Digital Library, page 111, 2008.
[9]
Radim
ˇ
Reh
˚
u
ˇ
rek and Petr Sojka.
Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora.
In Pro-
ceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks, pages 45–50, Valletta,
Malta, May 2010. ELRA.
urlhttp://is.muni.cz/publication/884893/en.
[10]
Karen Sparck Jones. A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its application in retrieval. Journal
of documentation, 28(1):11–21, 1972.
