Competency models in graduate healthcare management education 267
Melanie P Standish, BS
Competency Models in Graduate 
Healthcare Management Education: 
Analysis of Current Practices and 
Recommendations for Getting to Best 
Practices
Please address correspondence to: Melanie P Standish, Department of Psychology, Lewis 
College of Human Sciences, Illinois Institute of Technology, 201 Tech Central, 3424 South State 
Street, Chicago, Illinois 60616; Phone: (708) 856-5554; Email: mstandis@hawk.iit.edu
Acknowledgement: The author thanks Alyssa Matias for her support in organizing the data for 
this paper.
Abstract
In the interest of supporting dialogue about the use of competency models in 
graduate healthcare management education programs, I was invited by the 
special issue editor to conduct a survey of current practices in the field. This 
analysis was made possible in large part because these programs are required, 
as a condition of accreditation, to provide public access to the models their 
programs adopt. As such most models are available via program websites. 
To provide context, I open the paper with a brief overview of the history and 
science of competency modeling as practiced by the profession of industrial/
organizational psychology, as well as our current best-practice guidelines. I 
then describe the CAHME guidelines, as well as the types and characteristics 
of competency models currently being used by CAHME-accredited programs, 
in the context of these best-practice definitions. I also provide a synthesis of 
these models that was completed with the assistance of a natural language 
processing program. I conclude the paper with a summary of some of the 
challenges I believe that healthcare management faces in its use of competency 
models and recommendations for the future.
268 The Journal of Health Administration Education Spring 2018 
Introduction
In support of this special issue on competency modeling, I was asked by the 
guest editor to provide a perspective on competency models from the profes-
sion that has been most responsible for their adoption and use in the field of 
practice: industrial/organizational psychology. In responding to this request, 
I will (a) provide some context by providing a definition, some history, and 
current guidelines concerning best practices; (b) analyze and synthesize the 
models currently used by healthcare management graduate programs; and 
(c) develop recommendations for how the field might best move in the direc-
tion of these best practices. The results of these efforts appear below, starting 
with the history.
History
Before beginning an analysis, it will be important to clarify what competencies 
are (and are not), since there appears to be variability in how these terms are 
currently used in healthcare management education. For the purposes of this 
review, I will adopt the definition provided by Campion, Fink, Ruggeberg, 
Carr, and Phillips (2011, p. 226), which defines competencies as: “collections of 
knowledge, skills, abilities, and other characteristics (KSAOs) that are needed 
for effective performance in the jobs in question.” This definition underscores 
three important properties of competencies. First, they are broader in scope 
than concepts such as learning objectives and behaviors. Second, they extend 
beyond knowledge and include its appropriate practical application. Finally, 
they relate to specific jobs or roles. 
The glossary of the current Commission on the Accreditation of Heathcare 
Management Education (CAHME) self-study document (CAHME Self-Study 
Handbook, 2017) contains a definition for “Competence/Competency.” While 
this definition is roughly compatible with the Campion definition, I caution 
against using the term “competence” interchangeably with “competency,” 
since it is likely to cause confusion. When most professions use the term 
“competence,” they are referring to a specific individual’s capabilities, whereas 
“competencies” refers to the definition of effective performance. In other words, 
you assess a person’s “competence” using measures of performance of one or 
more specific “competencies.” 
Competency models: a brief history
Graduate healthcare management, which can trace its roots back at least as 
far as the 1930’s (Davis, 1984), predates the appearance of competency models 
and competency-based higher education. The first use of the latter came in 
Competency models in graduate healthcare management education 269
1968, when several pilot programs were launched by the U.S. Department of 
Education to improve the preparation of elementary school teachers (Nodine, 
2016). At about the same time in history, competency modeling started to see 
widespread adoption in corporate workplaces, especially in the United States. 
In that context, computing technologies were beginning to accelerate the pace 
of change, and traditional approaches to understanding and managing perfor-
mance (e.g,. job analysis), started to be viewed as too cumbersome and inflex-
ible for use with knowledge workers. Using an approach called Behavioral 
Event Interviewing (BEI), an adaptation of the critical incident interviewing 
technique (Flanagan, 1954), more flexible models of performance could be 
developed for these and other types of roles (McClelland, 1998).
In the decades to follow, the growth and popularity of competency mod-
els led to considerable variation in their use, and a lack of clarity regarding 
what constituted appropriate practice. Concerns about rigor and quality of 
practice led the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychologists (SIOP) 
to create a task group to examine how competency models were being used. 
The task force validated the concerns that many approaches being used at 
the time lacked an appropriate level of rigor, and called for greater attention 
to competency model development, particularly in circumstances where em-
ployment decisions were being informed by competency-based assessment 
(Shippmann et al., 2000).
Competencies in practice: the current state-of-the art
In 2010, the SIOP task force for competency models was reinstated with a 
charge to develop clearer practice guidelines for competency modeling. The 
work of the task force culminated in a publication in 2011, listing 20 practice 
guidelines in three areas of practice: model development, organizing and 
presenting competency information, and application (Campion et al., 2011). 
Model development guidelines related to ensuring that a model aligns with 
the organi zation’s mission and strategic objectives, and is based on a rigorous 
analysis of the actual work of stakeholders rather than the opinions of a few 
key leaders. Organization/presentation guidelines involved ensuring that 
models were designed with the end user in mind, providing enough detail 
for appropriate application but not so much as to make the model unwieldy. 
Application guidelines focused on ensuring that models would be appropri-
ately integrated into the full complement of human resource functions, and 
that provisions were proactively put in place to ensure a review / update cycle 
took place every five years (or fewer) so that the model continued to fit the 
organization’s current strategic priorities and needs (Campion et al., 2011).
270 The Journal of Health Administration Education Spring 2018 
Competencies in leadership
Effective performance in leadership roles has been a core focus of industrial/
organizational psychology for over a century. Throughout this history, prog-
ress has involved cycles of theory expansion followed by efforts to synthesize 
and consolidate findings into a coherent whole. Earlier cycles identified tasks 
and relationships to be core elements of the leadership role; more recent cycles 
added an emphasis on helping people and organizations to change. Most 
recently, Gary Yukl (2012) synthesized the evidence base about leadership 
performance to create a competency meta-model, which identified 15 com-
petencies within four domains: Task-oriented, Relations-oriented, Change-
oriented, and External. While the model did not directly address the concept 
of management as a “profession” (i.e., its responsibility to society as a whole), 
the discussion section of the paper identified ethics and social responsibility as 
important areas for future work. With the addition of these concepts, Yukl’s 
work provided the most robust foundation for a competency model that is 
specific to professional management. 
Competencies in accreditation
The Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Management Education 
(CAHME) requires its accredited programs to identify a competency model by 
which their program measures student success (CAHME Self Study Handbook, 
2017). The handbook does not identify a specific set of competencies to be 
used by programs, noting that programs have the freedom to select compe-
tencies that most closely fit the program’s mission. However, the handbook 
does identify four broad areas (I will refer to these as “domains”) programs 
must address: (a) communications and interpersonal effectiveness; (b) critical 
thinking, analysis, and problem solving; (c) management and leadership; and 
(d) professionalism and ethics. Each domain description contains a list of 
example competencies that might fit the CAHME definition. Given the level 
of freedom that individual programs have to define competencies locally, an 
important question I hope to address in this review is whether a core set of 
competencies might be identified that could more robustly define the educa-
tional pathway for professional healthcare managers. 
Methods
Identification of competency models
To examine current practices, my first step was to compile models currently 
being used by CAHME-accredited programs. Using the “Search for an Ac-
credited Program” feature on CAHME’s website, I created a list of all currently 
Competency models in graduate healthcare management education 271
accredited programs. This step identified 98 unique programs. I then visited 
each program’s website and searched for the page describing the program’s 
competency model. I looked for a description of how the model was developed 
(i.e., in-house vs. adopted). If no description was provided, I examined the 
model against other models cited in the CAHME guide to identify evidence 
that the model had been derived from one of these models. I also compiled 
each of the model descriptions into an Excel workbook. Descriptions varied 
considerably in their level of detail. However, when possible, I attempted to 
parse the model into the following levels of scope: domains, competencies, 
competency levels, and behavioral statements.
Model synthesis
To develop a synthesis across models, I first needed to identify a referent model 
for use in comparing across programs. For two reasons, I selected the Yukl 
(2012) model for this purpose. First, as previously noted, the model is rooted 
in research on leadership performance, broadly defined. This work expands 
upon the factor analysis research by Yukl, Gordon, and Taylor (2002), in which 
the researchers created a hierarchical taxonomy based on the extensive empirical 
research on effective leadership. The selection of this model ties back to best 
practices in competency modeling identified by Campion et al. (2011), which 
included the need for a more rigorous methodological approach to competen-
cies. The selection of Yukl (2012) as the referent model for finding a core set 
of competencies meets the methodological rigor that Campion et al. (2001) 
suggests. Second, because the model was not explicitly mentioned by any of 
the programs, it can provide a starting point that is not overly biased toward 
the practices of one or more current programs. To expand the relevance of the 
Yukl model to healthcare management, I also created two new competency 
definitions from the discussion section of his article, capturing the ethical and 
social responsibility components he mentioned for future research.
With the referent model specified, I next examined the population of 
competency models currently in use, along with their origins. This analysis 
indicated that most programs fell into one of three categories: (1) adaptations 
of the National Center for Healthcare Leadership (NCHL) model; (2) adapta-
tions of the American College of Healthcare Executives and/or Healthcare 
Leadership Alliance (ACHE/HLA) competencies; and (3) models that were 
either locally developed or whose origins were not identifiable. 
To develop a synthesis model, I conducted crosswalks against the revised 
Yukl model using the NCHL model, the ACHE competencies, as well as eight 
programs selected to represent the locally-developed category. To help en-
sure the crosswalks were completed as objectively as possible, I conducted 
272 The Journal of Health Administration Education Spring 2018 
this step with the assistance of the software program CrossBot v1.1 (Garman 
& Lindsey, 2017). CrossBot uses an open-source natural language processor 
(Gensim v2.1 – Rehurek & Sojka, 2010) to calculate the similarity between two 
competencies, using a metric that identifies both the overlap of words as well 
as their relative frequency of use within the corpus. The technique, called co-
sine similarity, provides a metric on a 0-1 scale that increases as two passages 
of text become both more similar and more distinct from other passages. The 
program has a long history of use and success in many applications involving 
the identification of related texts (Fang, Tao, & Zhai, 2004). Once cosines have 
been calculated, CrossBot then flags the best match between competencies in 
the comparison model and each competency in the referent model.
Results
Descriptive statistics 
From the website searches, I was able to find competency model data for 86 
of the 98 programs. For 11 of the remaining 12, I was not able to identify any 
evidence that their model was posted on their website, and 1 program refer-
enced a model but the hyperlink was broken. For the programs I could find 
competency models for, the mean number of competency domains for each 
model was 3.9 (SD=1.8) and the average number of competencies for each 
model was 21.4 (SD= 11.1). In terms of origin, 43% of the programs either 
did not provide source information for their model or indicated it had been 
developed locally. Of the programs that indicated a source, 52% had adapted 
their model from the National Center for Healthcare Leadership, 41% had 
adapted their model from American College of Healthcare Executives, and 
7% mentioned a different source. 
Model synthesis
For the computer-assisted analysis, I first conducted a comparison of NCHL 
and ACHE to the Yukl model, using cosines of .30 or higher as for identify-
ing matches. This cutoff identified matches for the following competencies: 
Encouraging Innovation, Networking, Advocating Change, Problem Solving, 
Envisioning Change, and Ethical Practices. The .30 cutoff was selected in refer-
ence to the research findings of Garman, Standish, and Kim (2018). 
I next searched for potential sources of profession-specific competencies by 
comparing the ACHE and NCHL models directly to each other. This analysis 
identified four additional competencies: Communication Skills, Human Re-
source Management, Financial Skills, and Information Technology Manage-
ment. Aggregating the two steps above yielded a core model containing 10 
competencies (see Table 1 for competency descriptions). 
Competency models in graduate healthcare management education 273
My next step was to compare the CAHME domains against the synthesized 
competency list that I’ll refer to as the Core Model. In this analysis, three of 
the four CAHME competency domains matched the Core Model. While the 
Core Model accounted for 75% of the required CAHME domains, the CAHME 
domains only matched with about 40% of the Core Model, suggesting that 
the current CAHME domains do not span the breadth of competencies that I 
am suggesting in this paper. 
By selecting eight programs from this list, I then compared the fit of this 
Core Model to programs using locally developed models. I found that com-
petencies in the locally-developed models matched 45.0% of the Core Model 
on average (SD= .178). This means that locally developed models are only 
accounting for about half of the competencies that the Core Model suggests.
When examining how locally-developed models overlapped with the Core 
Model, the percentages of overlap were rather small, suggesting that there 
is a large number of extraneous competencies across the programs which do 
not map to the core competencies I identified in Table 1.
Table 1
Competency list resulting from the synthesis across program
Study
Competency
Description
Yukl 
(2012)
Encouraging 
Innovation
Encourages innovative thinking and new ap-
proaches for solving problems and promotes the 
adoption of innovative new products, services, 
or processes.
Yukl 
(2012)
Networking
Uses social networks and events to build and 
maintain favorable relationships with peers, 
superiors, and outsiders beyond the organiza-
tion who can provide useful information or 
assistance.
Yukl 
(2012)
Advocating 
Change
Proposes desirable changes based on potential 
threats or opportunities and explains why the 
change is appropriate. Takes personal risk to 
promote the change despite difficulty.
Yukl 
(2012)
Problem Solving
Identifies work-related problems that can 
disrupt operations, analyzes and diagnoses the 
situation, and then acts to resolve the issue in a 
confident way.
274 The Journal of Health Administration Education Spring 2018 
Yukl 
(2012)
Envisioning 
Change
Communicates a clear, appealing vision that is 
linked to member values and ideals. Describes a 
proposed change or new initiative with enthusi-
asm and optimism.
Yukl 
(2012)
Ethical Practices
Communicates ethical standards and conduct. 
Models ethical behavior, and opposes unethical 
conduct.
Calhoun 
et al. 
(2008)
Communication 
Skills
Speaks, writes, and presents in a logical manner 
and appropriately prepares content for business 
presentations and group meetings.
Calhoun 
et al. 
(2008)
Financial Skills
Understands and explains financial and account-
ing information. Possesses the ability to prepare 
and manage budgets. Makes justifiable long-
term investment decisions
Calhoun 
et al. 
(2008)
Human Resources 
Management
Understands and correctly implements best 
human resource practices to meet the strategic 
goals of the organization.
Calhoun 
et al. 
(2008)
Information 
Technology 
Management
Identifies opportunities to adopt administrative 
and clinical technology that will improve work-
force performance. Actively promotes the utiliza-
tion and continuous upgrading of information 
management tools.
NOTE: Descriptions adapted from references listed.
Recommendations
In analyzing current practices in graduate healthcare management education 
against the synthesized Core Model of suggested competencies, I offer three 
concerns which tie back to the best practices highlighted by Campion et al. 
(2011). 
My first concern relates to the decentralized approach taken to defining 
the profession. According to the self-study handbook, the mission, vision, and 
values of the program are all defined locally, implying that the profession itself 
is also locally defined. While this approach may afford programs maximum 
flexibility in meeting local needs, the creation of many local identities probably 
interferes with the development of a more robust broader definition. The results 
of this work indicate that there are a wide range of extraneous competencies 
across locally developed models that do not map on to the core competencies 
I identified from the overlapping work of Yukl, NCHL, and ACHE. Accord-
Table 1, cont.
Competency models in graduate healthcare management education 275
ing to the best practices highlighted by Campion et al. (2011), competencies 
should not only be related to organizational goals and objectives, but should 
also be related to the entire organizational context. My recommendation is to 
consider a more balanced approach in which there is a central definition that 
is then tailored to local needs rather than being authored at the local level. 
My second concern relates to how broadly the accreditation criteria define 
competencies, given how important competencies are to the overall accredita-
tion process. According to Campion et al. (2011), best practices for competency 
modeling include the use of a common language, which seems to be lacking 
across CAHME-accredited programs as evidenced by the many extraneous 
competencies in locally developed models which did not overlap with the sug-
gested Core Model competencies. Because the CAHME competency domains 
provide so much latitude for local customization, their utility in specifying a 
common language of performance for the profession seems limited. My recom-
mendation for this concern is to develop or adopt a more robust competency 
model in common, or else at least strengthen the guidelines for development 
and validation at the local level. In terms of the former, the modeling work 
presented in this paper could provide a useful starting point for this work. In 
terms of the latter, guidelines such as those provided by Campion et al. (2011) 
could provide this guidance. 
My third and final concern relates to the gaps that were identified by the 
crosswalks to the Yukl (2012) leadership research synthesis. While some of 
these gaps may reflect differences in the language used to describe competen-
cies, others may represent missed opportunities to develop future healthcare 
leaders in ways that will maximize their performance. For example, Yukl’s 
“External” domain, which includes competencies related to how a leader 
coordinates their work with other leaders within and/or outside of their orga-
nization, may provide helpful guidance as health systems continue to diversify 
their organizational forms and relationships (e.g., Garman & Canar, 2013). 
Campion et al. (2011) recommends that competencies should be maintained 
over time, as to keep a model relevant to the future of a given organization or 
profession. As graduate healthcare management education aims to prepare 
students in their transition into becoming future professionals, this concern 
becomes particularly salient. To address this concern, my recommendation is 
to incorporate a periodic review of the management and leadership research 
to ensure that curriculum development is informed by this evolving evidence 
base.
276 The Journal of Health Administration Education Spring 2018 
Conclusion
Throughout the process of conducting the research described in this paper, it 
was clear to me that the work healthcare managers do is extremely important. 
From a mission perspective, it would certainly seem like it meets the defini-
tion of a profession. However, the breadth of competency models being used 
suggest a lack of a clear definition of the profession’s boundaries and core 
competencies. While the concerns presented in this paper are distinct, they 
all relate back to the same core problem, which is the absence of a robust, 
universally recognized definition of healthcare management’s mission and 
scope of practice – the lack of a clear professional identity. I hope that the 
analysis provided here will contribute toward adopting a more rigorous set of 
core competencies, as well as making better use of the models already used.
References
ACHE Healthcare Executive Competencies Assessment Tool [Pamphlet]. (2016). 
Healthcare Leadership Alliance and the American College of Healthcare 
Executives. 
CAHME Self-study Handbook (2017). Retrieved December 17, 2017 from 
http://www.cahme.net.
Calhoun, J. G., Dollett, L., Sinioris, M. E., Wainio, J., Butler, P. W., Griffith, 
J. R., . . . Warden, 
G. L. (2008). Development of an Interprofessional 
Competency Model for Healthcare Leadership. Journal of Healthcare 
Management, 53(6), 375-391.
Campion, M., Fink, A., Ruggeberg, B. J., Carr, L., & Phillips, G. M. (2011). 
Doing Competencies Well: Best Practices in Competency Modeling. 
Personnel Psychology, 64, 
225-262.
Davis, M. M. (1984). Development of the first graduate program in hospital 
administration. Journal of Health Administration Education, 2(2), 121-134.
Fang, H., Tao, T., & Zhai, C. X. (2004). A formal study of information retrieval 
heuristics. In K. Järvelin, M. Sanderson, P. Bruza, & J. Allan (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in 
information retrieval (SIGIR’04) (pp. 49–56). ACM.
Flanagan, J. C. (1954). The critical incident technique. Psychological Bulletin, 
51(4), 327-358.
Competency models in graduate healthcare management education 277
Garman, A. N., & Canar, W. J. (2013). Consulting psychology in the health 
sector: A reflection on the last and next decades. Consulting Psychology 
Journal: Practice and Research, 65(4), 309-313. 
Garman, A. N. & Lindsey, Z. (2017). CrossBot v1.1 – a Gensim-enabled Python 
program to automate competency crosswalks. Working paper, Rush University 
HSM Leadership Center.
Garman, A.N., Standish, M. P., Kim, D.H. (2018). Enhancing efficiency, 
reliability and rigor in competency model crosswalks through natural 
language processing. Working papers, Department of Health Systems 
Management, Rush University. 
McClelland, D. C. (1973). Testing for Competence Rather Than for Intelligence. 
American Psychologist, 1-14.
McClelland, D. C. (1998). Identifying Competencies with Behavioral-Event 
Interviews. Psychological Science, 9(5), 331-339.
Nodine, T. (2016). How did we get here? A brief history of competency-based 
higher education in the United States. The Journal of Competency-Based 
Education, 1(1), 5-11.
Overview of the HLA Competency Directory. (2010). Retrieved December 14, 
2017, from http://www.healthcareleadershipalliance.org/Overview%20
of%20the%20HLA%20Competency%20Directory.pdf
Peterson, D. R. (1976). Is psychology a profession? American Psychologist, 
31(8), 572-581.
Řehurek, R. & Sojka, P. (2010). Software Framework for Topic Modelling with 
Large Corpora. In Proceedings of LREC 2010 workshop New Challenges 
for NLP Frameworks. Valletta, Malta: University of Malta. p. 46-50, 5 pp. 
ISBN 2-9517408-6-7.
Salton, G. (1991). Developments in automated text retrieval. Science, 253, 974-980.
Shippmann, J. S., Ash, R. S., Battista, M., Carr, L., Eyde, L. D., Hesketh, B., . . . 
Prien, E. P. (2000). The Practice of Competency Modeling. Personnel 
Psychology, 53, 703-740.
278 The Journal of Health Administration Education Spring 2018 
Stefl, M. E. (2008). Common Competencies for All Healthcare Managers: The 
Healthcare Leadership Alliance Model. Journal of Healthcare Management, 
53(6), 360-373.
Yukl, G. (2012). Effective Leadership Behavior: What We Know and What 
Questions Need More Attention. Academy of Management Perspectives, 26(4), 
66-85. 
Yukl, G., Gordon, A., & Taber, T. (2002). A Hierarchical Taxonomy of 
Leadership Behavior: Integrating a Half Century of Behavior Research. 
Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 9, 15-32.
Reproduced with permission of copyright owner.
Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
