Table ignored!
being virtually endorsed by all mathematicians , new initiatives appeared worldwide , from a wide range of organisations
with possibly different views on content selection , cooper - ation , and business model .
The European Mathematical Society ( EMS ) , which had been involved in this process
from the beginning ,
organised brainstorming meetings in Berlingen ( Switzerland ) in 2002 and 2003 ,
yielding an “
)hyphen − five.8917( xp ression o
finter st ”
e t − ot − er − h
e−s
n − E − e
u−tro−tpean
Commission in 2003 ,
and a
proposal to FP 5 for an infrastructure called DML - EU . Despite the lack of a formal success of this European initiative
,
a number of meetings ,
conferences and lo cal
DML activities have been organized since 2003 ,
thus demonstrating
even stronger the ur - gent needs of
the global
scientific community .
This continuous work allowed participants to
keep track of :
the ongoing activities , emerging best practices , as well as the techni - cal challenges related to the
development of a “ parenright − hyphen5eight − period
nine − zero17( ma t − lh − se − em − ma − at − n − ic − t
i−ac
web ” .
Finally the idea for a common DML infrastructure for access to the mathematical knowledge in Europe was
successfully materialised within the frames of the project European Digital
Mathematics Library
– EuDML .
3 .
The
European
Digital
Mathematics
Library
–
EuDML .
The
EuDML project
obtained support from the European Commission in the framework of the Infor -
mation and Communications Technologies Policy Support Programme ( CIP ICT PSP ,
“ parenright − hyphen
589
17( Op en ac c s − e sto
s c − i
entfi
cin f o rmation ,
p
o e − j ct
n
o − parenright
period−period
T − twozero − h − five
e
zero − offi − three cial start of the
project was on February 1 , 20 1 0 for a duration of 36 months [ 2 ] .
The project consortium consists of 1 4 European partners ( Table 1 ) ,
among which universities , public institutions
and leading technology providers , dedicated to produc - ing quality scientific information .
The project partner teams
include mathematicians , librarians , digital library specialists , publishers , professional information service and doc -
ument engineering specialists , and computer scientists .
The consortium is strengthened by its 2 associated partners
:
the European Mathematical
Society is associated to the project as the relevant organization for setting the goals
and assessing the usefulness of
the project ’
s outcome ,
it will
chair the Scientific advisory board ;
the University
Library of G ¨
o ttingen will
contribute j ournals digitised in the ERAM and RusDML projects ,
as well
as the largest
collection of digitised mathematical books .
The main goal
of the EuDML project is to establish a pilot implementation of an integrated mathematics digital
library system allowing for seamless access for otherwise dispersed digital material of the partners and associates .
The main outcome of the envisioned library service is expected to set - up a network of
institutions where the digital
items would be physically archived .
Each local
( partner ) institution is assigned
with the following tasks :
selecting , acquiring , developing , main - taining ,
cataloguing and indexing ,
as well
as preserving its own collections according to clear policies .
Thus they will
play the role of
a reference memory
institution for a well - defined part of the mathematical corpus .
The network of institutions as a whole would make it possible to assemble a global , virtual library providing a one -
s top gateway
to the distributed content through user - friendly retrieval interfaces .
Moreover , published standards
of interoperability would allow this virtual library to serve as an infrastructure layer for any component of the scientist
’ s environment where reference to a published mathematical result is necessary , turning a mere intellectual reference
into an actual link to the result .
The EuDML system ( Fig .
1 ) is based on Service Oriented Architecture .
It is de -
72
Fig .
1 .
EuDML functional vision
signed to embrace a set of core services ( sufficient for the basic system operation ) and
a number of enriching services ( e .
g .
publication metadata store , the indexing and the
search services , the content storage system and structured publication browsing services )
( Fig .
2 ) .
The extensibility and the multidimensional scalability of the EuDML platform are its key features :
allowing easy
addition of
new services ( and content ) ,
additional
volume ,
new content ’
s structure ,
concurrent users ,
etc .
,
without performance or reliability degra -
Fig .
2 .
EuDML core and extension services
74
dation .
A natural solution towards these concepts is a modular , distributed architecture .
The Metadata Repository
,
which manages a replica of all the metadata for all the items in the different content repositories is at the core .
It
does not contain actual object
items , which remain in the lo cal repositories ( this way we avoid to have to deal with IPR
issues , leaving the control of that to the local repositories ) .
The Metadata Repository
manages the metadata updates from the lo cal repositories .
It will support adapting the
different forms of metadata that each provider has about their items to the common format required by the EuDML .
To support those processes , the Metadata Repository
also will comprise in its internal architecture a Metadata Registry
.
Some items in the content repositories may not yet be freely accessible , but may need enhancement of their metadata
.
Hence ,
a facility is planned for content providers to invoke the Metadata Enhancer
directly on their privileged
access items via
the External
Services Interface ,
to enhance the metadata before uploading .
At the bottom is
the collection of Local
Repositories .
Each content provider maintains its own collection of items ,
which can be
supplied on demand .
Such requests are via
identifiers , i .
e .
the content repositories are not required to provide
search or browse facilities , but merely to manage their collections of items , provide access via
identifiers and manage
right of access issues corresponding the to moving wall open access policy adopted by the consortium .
The Search Engine
provides search and item identifier resolution facilities .
The Meta - data Repository mediates
with the content repositories to fetch actual items for the higher levels of the system .
The Metadata Enhancer
is a component that can identify items for which it might be able to enhance the existing
metadata , including fetching the item and analyse it
( e .
g .
using current OCR , math formula recognition , keyword extraction , signature file
construction , bibliography analysis technologies ) .
This component will actually consist of a range of different tools
,
that can be improved and extended over time ,
and that can handle different aspects of
individual
item metadata
enhancement .
The Association Analyser
works on metadata for sets of different items , rather than , as in the case of the Metadata
Enhancer , on single items .
It identifies related items from the metadata records and updates the metadata accordingly
so that various links between documents ,
or links to relevant external resources ,
can be recorded in the Metadata
Repository .
The Annotation Component
provides mechanisms to attach new material
to individual
items in the repositories
and maintain this new material .
It is envisaged that this will support community interactivity with the collection by
allowing users to add , view and update their own reviews , tutorials , comments , or recommendations to each item .
The Accessibility Component
provides support for enhancing accessibility of items , if required , before presentation
to end users .
For visually impaired or dyslexic users ,
this will involve speech synthesis for text or for mathematical formulae ( via
MathML
annotation ) , large print re - formatting or OCR facilities to make scanned image items
accessible to Braille readers .
Automatic translation facilities will be provided for texts in a language not understood
by the user .
The
Web
User Interface
and the External
Services Interface
provide public access to the system both via
web browsers and by web services .
This comprises bidirectional interoperability with external resources such as the
Math Genealogy , MacTutor History of Mathematics , Mathworld , Wikipedia , EqWorld and other mathematical and
science
75
related web resources .
Interoperability with Europeana will be also considered at this level .
The EuDML system ’ s architecture will be
developed taking into
account the de - tailed functional requirements
specifications .
The extensibility , scalability and reliability requirements make it natural to look for a fully distributed
, platform independent solu -
tion .
While the general architecture design will follow the Service Oriented Architecture
( SOA ) paradigm ,
the communication layer will
remain abstract .
This will
enable the individual
services to
communicate through different appropriate means , including pos -
sible direct connection when deployed in a single lo cation ( host ) .
Furthermore , universal
SOAP communication will be maintained as the default for ex ibility and compatibility reasons , and more lightweight
remote communication will be provided when necessary .
Each of the functional modules presented above will be accomplished by means of a separate service or a group of
services acting together .
The Metadata Store
will be composed of several separate services acting together :
a Metadata Repository Manager
;
a Storage Manager
;
and a Metadata Registry
.
An important requirement is also to provide the assignment
of a persistent identifier to each entity ,
and the ability of the related resolution service to point to a lo cal
copy and
back to the original resource ’ s lo cations .
Despite the fact that EuDML will
be used its internal
common metadata schema ,
it is anticipated that multiple
different metadata patterns will
be used by different content providers and data sources ,
and these will
have to be
reversibly mapped onto the internal data structure .
That implies an additional requirement for the Metadata Store
, viz .
to support the synchronization of the different metadata forms with the format required by the EuDML . For
that purpose , the Metadata Repository
will also include a Metadata
Registry
in its internal architecture [ 3 ] .
The other expected functions , including annotation , accessibility , metadata enhancer or association analyser will
be realised as separate enriching services ,
that while following the same service design principles ,
will
be considered
extension services .
Examples of
such services include the Citation Service ,
responsible for citation resolving and
indexing or
Similarity Service [
4 ]
,
which would be able to return similar objects based on a predefined metrics and criteria .
Similarly ,
additional
extension services are hoped to be developed in the future by third parties or by the involved
partners .
One or more
Web
User Interface Services
will be developed , based on user require - ments criteria .
Functional
interfaces and widgets is also envisaged to enable the inclusion of an EuDML Search Box
in other lo cal systems and
portals .
All the system ’ s operations will be managed via
a process management service , responsible for operation
scheduling , synchronisation and timely execution , and for the overall system level integrity of the
services .
4 .
The
Bulgarian Digital Mathematics Library – BulDML .
The IMI - BAS repository developed
under the EuDML project is based on the DSpace software with an active and configured OAI - PMH interface for
metadata harvesting .
A permanent unique
identifier from Handle .
NET system is assigned to each article
( not only for citation
needs ) .
These identifiers together with OAI - PMH make it possible to build a network of
repositories ,
search
portals , and centralised web services .
The BulDML provides an open access to all its content .
When performing a search the user can view the individual search result ( a record
76
