This is a repository copy of Using TF-IDF n-gram and word embedding cluster ensembles 
for author profiling: Notebook for PAN at CLEF 2017.
White Rose Research Online URL for this paper:
http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/128573/
Version: Published Version
Proceedings Paper:
Poulston, A., Waseem, Z. and Stevenson, M. orcid.org/0000-0002-9483-6006 (2017) 
Using TF-IDF n-gram and word embedding cluster ensembles for author profiling: 
Notebook for PAN at CLEF 2017. In: Cappellato, L., Ferro, N., Goeuriot, L. and Mandl, T., 
(eds.) CEUR Workshop Proceedings. Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum 
(CLEF 2017), 11-14 Sep 2017, Dublin, Ireland. CEUR . 
A. Poulston et al: Using TF-IDF n-gram and word embedding cluster ensembles for author 
profiling: Notebook for PAN at CLEF 2017. Working Notes of CLEF 2017 - Conference and
Labs of the Evaluation Forum. Dublin, Ireland, September 11-14, 2017. CEUR-WS.org, 
online http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1866/paper_72.pdf
eprints@whiterose.ac.uk
https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/
Reuse 
Unless indicated otherwise, fulltext items are protected by copyright with all rights reserved. The copyright 
exception in section 29 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 allows the making of a single copy 
solely for the purpose of non-commercial research or private study within the limits of fair dealing. The 
publisher or other rights-holder may allow further reproduction and re-use of this version - refer to the White 
Rose Research Online record for this item. Where records identify the publisher as the copyright holder, 
users can verify any specific terms of use on the publisher’s website. 
Takedown 
If you consider content in White Rose Research Online to be in breach of UK law, please notify us by 
emailing eprints@whiterose.ac.uk including the URL of the record and the reason for the withdrawal request. 
Using TF-IDF n-gram and Word Embedding Cluster
Ensembles for Author Profiling
Notebook for PAN at CLEF 2017
Adam Poulston, Zeerak Waseem, and Mark Stevenson
Department of Computer Science
University of Sheffield, UK
{arspoulston1, z.w.butt, mark.stevenson}@sheffield.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper presents our approach and results for the 2017 PAN Au-
thor Profiling Shared Task.
Language-specific corpora were provided for four
langauges: Spanish, English,
Portuguese, and Arabic. Each corpus consisted of
tweets authored by a number of Twitter users labeled with their gender and the
specific variant of their language which was used in the documents (e.g. Brazil-
ian or European Portuguese). The task was to develop a system to infer the same
attributes for unseen Twitter users. Our system employs an ensemble of two prob-
abilistic classifiers: a Logistic regression classifier trained on TF-IDF transformed
n–grams and a Gaussian Process classifier trained on word embedding clusters
derived for an additional, external corpus of tweets.
1
Introduction
Author profiling is the task of determining the characteristics of the individual
who
wrote a document. Many different characteristics can be determined (e.g. personal char-
acteristics such as gender, age, personality [19] and socioeconomic indicators [5,13,14,15])
across a variety of media (e.g.
written essays,
books,
blogs and other social media).
Despite their potential ethical concerns, author profiling techniques can be a valuable
component in various applications, such as bias reduction in predictive models [2] and
language-variant adaption in part-of-speech taggers [1].
In this paper, we present our approach to the 2017 edition of the PAN Author Pro-
filing shared task [10,11,16]. A dataset was provided consisting of Twitter users across
four languages and their variants.
Each user was labeled with a binary gender label
(male/female) and the particular variant of their language (e.g. Brazilian vs European
Portuguese). The dataset was balanced by both gender and language variant. Given an
unseen user (and their native language), the task is to determine their gender and lan-
guage variant being used.
To predict gender and language variant,
we applied an ensemble of probabilistic
machine learning classifiers (described in detail in Section 2). First, an external Twitter
corpus was acquired and Tweets geo-located within the countries covered in the tasks
languages were extracted (except for the Arabic language variants).
This corpus was
divided into individual languages (Portuguese,
English and Spanish) and used to de-
rive Word2Vec word embeddings [7,8] for each language. Then, each set of language
specific word embeddings were clustered using K-Means to derive a set
of word to
cluster mappings,
which can be thought of as roughly analogous to topics in a topic
model. The normalised frequency of each word cluster across a user’s tweets was used
to train a Gaussian Process classifier. Second, a Logistic Regression classifier was then
trained using TF-IDF transformed unigram and bigram frequencies.
Both classifiers
were employed in an ensemble approach by averaging the predicted probabilities for
each sample to determine the label.
2
Approach
Our approach combines two probabilistic classifiers trained on distinct feature sets in
an ensemble to predict
gender and language variant.
Two classifiers were applied:
a
Logistic Regression classifier trained on TF-IDF
n
–grams (Section 2.1) and a Gaussian
Process classifier trained on word cluster frequencies (Section 2.2).
For each unseen
document,
probabilities from both classifiers are taken and averaged,
and the highest
average probability class is taken as the prediction. Models were trained using the im-
plementations found in scikit-learn [9] unless stated otherwise.
For Arabic data,
only the Logistic Regression classifier is applied,
as the volume
of geo-located Arabic tweets collected was too low to allow for training of robust
Word2Vec models for use with the Gaussian Process classifier.
2.1
Logistic regression classifier with TF-IDF n–grams
Word unigram and bigram features were extracted for each training document.
The
text was tokenised using a Twitter-aware tokeniser [4]; no additional steps were taken
to deal with the extra complexities of Arabic text.
A list of stop words was not used
while deriving
n
–gram features, instead tokens that appeared in more than 90% of the
documents were removed, as this allows for the removal of
n
–grams common across a
language’s variants while also removing stop words.
TF-IDF weighting was applied to down-weight
n
–grams common across the docu-
ments and assign a higher weight to
n
–grams which are rare.
A Logistic Regression classifier was trained for each language using the
n
–gram
features. Logistic Regression was chosen for use with the
n
–gram features because it
has been shown to perform well on similar high-dimensional classification tasks, and
produces probabilistic predictions [3].
2.2
Gaussian process classifier with word embedding clusters
We obtained the data for our word embedding clusters from a Twitter Firehose
1
sample
collected throughout 2015. We only used tweets that were geo-located in the specific
language regions determined by the shared task (see Table 1).
Some language variants were less frequent in the resulting datasets than others, for
instance we collected very few tweets from Ireland compared to the U.S.A.
Down-
sampling was used to avoid over representation of the more prevent language variants.
1
Twitter Firehose has since been discontinued and can no longer be accessed.
Table 1. Countries scraped for each language.
English (F
en
)
Spanish (F
sp
)
Portuguese (F
pt
)
Australia
Argentina
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Portugal
Great Britain
Colombia
Ireland
Mexico
New Zealand
Peru
United States
Spain
Venezuela
Data for the language variant with the largest volume of documents was reduced so that
it contained no more than
10
times number of tweets of the smallest language variant.
Word embeddings For each language dataset (
F
en
,
F
es
, and
F
pt
) were trained using
the Word2Vec [7,8] implementation in gensim [18] with Continuous Bag of Words
(CBOW), negative sampling, 200 dimensions, and a window size of 10.
We applied K-Means clustering [6] to the word embeddings to derive a set of 100
clusters for each language, in which each word is assigned a cluster based on its nearest
cluster in the embedding space.
We then computed the frequency distribution of the
clusters for every training document,
and used them as features to train a Gaussian
Process classifier with an RBF kernel [17].
Similar word embedding clusters have been applied with Gaussian Processes to
perform other author profiling tasks such as socio-economic status detection [5]; fur-
thermore, the derived clusters are similar to topics derived in a topic model, in that they
identify semantically similar groups of words in documents, which we found to perform
well in a similar task [12].
3
Results
Table 2 shows the accuracy scores achieved by a Support Vector Machine (SVM) classi-
fier with a linear kernel, trained on the same TF-IDF
n
–grams described in Section 2.1.
We chose this approach as our baseline, as it has been shown to perform well on similar
tasks and represent a strong baseline.
Table 2. Baseline accuracy scores for gender and language variant prediction for each language
derived from a SVM classifier trained on TF-IDF n–grams.
Target
Spanish English Portuguese
Arabic
Gender
0.7361
0.7896
0.8263
0.7450
Language variant
0.9532
0.8617
0.9800
0.8150
Joint
0.7007
0.6838
0.8113
0.6275
Table 3. Accuracy scores for gender and language variant prediction for each language as sub-
mitted for the PAN: Author Profiling task 2017.
Target
Spanish English Portuguese
Arabic
Gender
0.7939
0.7829
0.8388
0.7738
Language variant
0.9368
0.8038
0.9763
0.7975
Joint
0.7471
0.6254
0.8188
0.6356
Table 3 shows the results of our final submitted run for the PAN: Author Profiling
task 2017. For Spanish, English and Portuguese the results were attained by applying
the ensemble of Logistic Regression and Gaussian Process classifiers described in Sec-
tion 2; for Arabic only the Logistic regression classifier was applied (Section 2.1). In
the rankings for the PAN Author Profiling shared task [16], our approach achieved 7th
place out of 22 entries for joint prediction and 6th for gender, exceeding reported base-
lines. We achieved poorer results for language variant prediction at 9th place, and did
not exceed the baseline approach.
3.1
Discussion
In Table 3, we see that the our ensemble performs quite well for identifying language
variant or gender individually.
For joint prediction our ensemble performs less well,
likely due to errors in either gender or language variant prediction propagating through
to incorrect joint predictions. Of the three languages the ensemble was applied to, the
best performance was observed for Portuguese and the worst for English. Broad topics
of interest
appear to be effective for the gender prediction problem while individual
terms that are unique to specific language variants are more discriminating for language
variant prediction.
Similar to our results in a previous PAN: Author Profiling Profiling shared task en-
try [12], in which LDA topic models were able to improve predictive performance over
word
n
–grams, word embedding clusters improved predictive accuracy for gender clas-
sification. For the language variant differentiation task, introducing the word embedding
clusters in fact reduced accuracy scores over earlier runs.
Under our current clustering scheme, each term was assumed to be equally as repre-
sentative of its cluster as each other term; in practise though, certain terms were closer
to the centroid in embedding space than others. Prior to submission we had begun ex-
perimenting with weighting terms based on their proximity to their closest centroid,
and our initial findings were promising. In future work we would like to investigate the
effect of weighting terms in more detail.
4
Conclusion
In this notebook,
we have shown that
by employing an ensemble of classifiers and
utilising clusters of word embeddings reasonable results can be achieved. We propose,
that our approach can be improved by weighting the word embedding clusters by the
distance to the cluster centroid.
References
1.
Blodgett, S.L., Green, L., O’Connor, B.: Demographic dialectal variation in social media: A
case study of african-american english pp. 1119–1130 (November 2016)
2.
Culotta, A.: Reducing sampling bias in social media data for county health inference. In:
Joint Statistical Meetings Proceedings (2014)
3.
Freedman, D.A.: Statistical models: theory and practice. cambridge university press (2009)
4.
Gimpel, K., Schneider, N., O’Connor, B., Das, D., Mills, D., Eisenstein, J., Heilman, M.,
Yogatama, D., Flanigan, J., Smith, N.a.: Part-of-speech tagging for Twitter: annotation,
features, and experiments. Human Language Technologies 2(2), 42–47 (2011)
5.
Lampos, V., Aletras, N., Geyti, J.K., Zou, B., Cox, I.J.: Inferring the socioeconomic status
of social media users based on behaviour and language (2016)
6.
MacQueen, J., et al.: Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate
observations. In: Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics
and probability. vol. 1, pp. 281–297. Oakland, CA, USA. (1967)
7.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J.: Efficient estimation of word representations in
vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013)
8.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G.S., Dean, J.: Distributed representations of
words and phrases and their compositionality. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems. pp. 3111–3119 (2013)
9.
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M.,
Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., Vanderplas, J., Passos, A., Cournapeau, D.,
Brucher, M., Perrot, M., Duchesnay, E.: Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal
of Machine Learning Research 12, 2825–2830 (2011)
10.
Potthast, M., Gollub, T., Rangel, F., Rosso, P., Stamatatos, E., Stein, B.: Improving the
Reproducibility of PAN’s Shared Tasks: Plagiarism Detection, Author Identification, and
Author Profiling. In: Kanoulas, E., Lupu, M., Clough, P., Sanderson, M., Hall, M., Hanbury,
A., Toms, E. (eds.) Information Access Evaluation meets Multilinguality, Multimodality,
and Visualization. 5th International Conference of the CLEF Initiative (CLEF 14). pp.
268–299. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York (Sep 2014)
11.
Potthast, M., Rangel, F., Tschuggnall, M., Stamatatos, E., Rosso, P., Stein, B.: Overview of
PAN’17: Author Identification, Author Profiling, and Author Obfuscation. In: Jones, G.,
Lawless, S., Gonzalo, J., Kelly, L., Goeuriot, L., Mandl, T., Cappellato, L., Ferro, N. (eds.)
Experimental IR Meets Multilinguality, Multimodality, and Interaction. 8th International
Conference of the CLEF Initiative (CLEF 17). Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York (Sep
2017)
12.
Poulston, A., Stevenson, M., Bontcheva, K.: Topic models and n-gram language models for
author profiling-notebook for pan at clef 2015. (2015)
13.
Poulston, A., Stevenson, M., Bontcheva, K.: User profiling with geo-located posts and
demographic data pp. 43–48 (November 2016)
14.
Preo¸tiuc-Pietro, D., Lampos, V., Aletras, N.: An analysis of the user occupational class
through Twitter content. Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) pp. 1754–1764 (2015)
15.
Preo¸tiuc-Pietro, D., Volkova, S., Lampos, V., Bachrach, Y., Aletras, N.: Studying user
income through language, behaviour and affect in social media. PloS one 10(9), e0138717
(2015)
16.
Rangel, F., Rosso, P., Potthast, M., Stein, B.: Overview of the 5th Author Profiling Task at
PAN 2017: Gender and Language Variety Identification in Twitter. In: Cappellato, L., Ferro,
N., Goeuriot, L., Mandl, T. (eds.) Working Notes Papers of the CLEF 2017 Evaluation
Labs. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, CLEF and CEUR-WS.org (sep 2017)
17.
Rasmussen, C.E., Williams, C.K.: Gaussian processes for machine learning, vol. 1. MIT
press Cambridge (2006)
18.
ˇ
Reh˚
u
ˇ
rek, R., Sojka, P.: Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. In:
Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks. pp.
45–50. ELRA, Valletta, Malta (May 2010)
19.
Schwartz, H.A., Eichstaedt, J.C., Kern, M.L., Dziurzynski, L., Ramones, S.M., Agrawal,
M., Shah, A., Kosinski, M., Stillwell, D., Seligman, M.E.P., Ungar, L.H.: Personality,
gender, and age in the language of social media: The open-vocabulary approach. PLoS
ONE 8(9), e73791 (09 2013)
