Gossip is more than just story telling 
Topic modeling and quantitative analysis on a spontaneous speech 
corpus
Boróka Pápay 
MTA TK “Lendület” Research Center 
for Educational and Network Studies 
(RECENS) 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 
Centre for Social Sciences, Budapest, 
Hungary 
papay.boroka@tk.mta.hu
Bálint György Kubik
MTA TK “Lendület” Research Center 
for Educational and Network Studies 
(RECENS) 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 
Centre for Social Sciences, Budapest, 
Hungary, 
Cleverbridge AG 
Cologne, Germany 
kubikbalint@gmail.com
Júlia Galántai 
MTA TK “Lendület” Research Center 
for Educational and Network Studies 
(RECENS) 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 
Centre for Social Sciences, Budapest, 
Hungary 
galantai.julia@tk.mta.hu
Abstract
Gossip is one of the most widespread human activities with multiple functions 
such as enhancing human cooperation, establishing social order, information 
sharing, norm enhancing or stress reduction. Gossip has been analyzed mostly 
by qualitative or survey methods. In this paper, we describe a quantitative 
approach to identify gossip in a large corpus containing spontaneous talk with 
LDA topic modeling and quantitative analysis. We aim to identify gossip and 
its characteristics to analyze its topics, the verbal and non-verbal emotions that 
were used during gossiping, and other non-textual data such as the number of 
speakers and the number of persons present during the gossiping events. We 
also analyze the topics to distinguish gossiping and storytelling by dividing 
gossip and non-gossip texts in our large spontaneous speech corpora. 
Keywords: 
LDA 
topic 
model, 
sentiment 
analysis, 
emotion 
analysis, 
spontaneous speech corpus, gossip, reputation, story
12
1 
Introduction
As two thirds of human conversations are about social topics that can be labeled as gossip, we can state that gossip is the 
core of social relations and society itself [
Dunbar04
]. Language caused a significant increase in communication in groups 
and in information exchange. It also allows us to get information about what happens in a social group, while gossip plays 
an important role in the sustaining of human cooperation [
Dunbar04
]. Gossip also often transmits reputational information 
about individuals, establishing social order, and enhances cooperation [
Feinberg14
], [
Hess06
]], [
Novak05
]. Gossip might 
also have several purposes for the group in which it occurs, and for individuals who use it. 
1
Copyright © 2018 for the individual papers by the paper’s authors. Copying permitted for private and academic purposes. This volume is published 
and copyrighted by its editors. 
In: A. Jorge, R. Campos, A. Jatowt, S. Nunes (eds.): Proceedings of the Text2StoryIR’18 Workshop, Grenoble, France, 26-March- 2018, published at 
http://ceur-ws.org 
2
The authors receive funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
(Grant agreement No 648693). 
On a group level, gossip not only enhances group norms, but contributes to interpretation of events, reducing anxiety in 
stressful situations and managing emotions [
Michaelson04
], [
Mills10
]. 
Gossip is “informal and evaluative talk in an organization, usually among no more than a few individuals, about another 
member of that organization who is not present” [
Kurland11
]. 
In our paper we analyze the distinction between gossiping and storytelling by dividing gossip and non-gossip texts in our 
large spontaneous speech corpora. To extract the hidden structure of spontaneous speech and to find those thematic topics 
that people are gossiping about we used topic modeling, specifically Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) which is an 
unsupervised 
automated 
analysis 
to 
capture 
information 
in 
large 
corpora 
[
Blei05
]. With 
topic 
modeling 
we 
can 
automatically classify and measure issues that occurred during spontaneous speech with those key linguistic and latent 
semantic features help us to determine the patterns and conversation behaviors during gossiping [
Bak14
]. When analyzing 
the hidden structure of spontaneous speech by topic modelling we can correlate the topics with characteristics such as the 
usage of verbal or nonverbal emotions during gossiping or features such as the number of persons present during 
conversations.
By using LDA topic modelling in our analysis the gossip topics were clearly separated from all other topics such as 
storytelling (stories about a third, but external person), cooking, dueling, playing games, etc. We can also assume that the 
two topics divide also in function and meaning as gossiping usually functions as building one’s own and destroys other 
individuals’ reputation. Gossip’s so-called storytelling functions serve more to enforce social norms and to maintain social 
bonding between the sender and the receiver of the story.
The first part gives an insight into our unique dataset. We use our database to test assumptions from the literature about 
gossip on a spontaneous human speech corpus. The methodology section of the article addresses the tools that were used 
to test these existing assumptions, such as text preprocessing, topic modelling and quantitative characteristics of the text. 
In the results chapter, we give qualitative interpretations to the topics in our topic universe as well as attempting to uncover 
relationships between topic memberships, manually annotated features with strong emphasis on gossip, and prevalent 
emotions identified using emotion dictionaries.
2 
Data and database
There has been research on analyzing the presence of gossip from resources like interviews, social media, workplace 
emails, surveys or anthropological observations [
Jones80], 
[
Mitra12
] 
but to extract gossip and to capture its features in 
everyday human communication from a spontaneous speech corpus is a relatively new approach in gossip research. 
For our analysis we used a unique corpus of Hungarian language which consists of approximately 550 hours of 
spontaneous speech. The documents are transcripts of organic human dialogues, separated by natural silence that are longer 
than 2 seconds. The high-quality audio recordings were recorded during a Hungarian entertainment programme covering a 
period of 8 days. We used approximately two thirds of the corpus for our analysis, since the manual transcription of the rest 
was still ongoing at the time. It is also important to note that the corpus is a work-in-progress. We are in the process of 
finalizing the transcriptions and conducting steps of quality assurance. The recordings were obtained using personal 
microphones of eight participants of a gameshow covering the whole interval of their wake times. The contacts of the 
participants were restricted to a closed environment as they had no or limited possibility to interact with the outside world. 
This analysis presents the results of the manual annotation of the HuTongue corpus, which can be a valuable linguistic 
resource for developing different types of automatic classifiers in the future. Manual annotation provided us the opportunity 
to tag those parts of the text where the speakers were talking about a person who was a participant or former participant of 
the gameshow, but was not present. These parts of the text were tagged by the annotators as gossip dialogues. Statements 
could be formed by the third person’s deeds, personality, and numerous other factors. We also included those texts, where 
the speaker made a statement about themselves in a relation with the third person. When the speakers were mentioning 
multiple participants who were not present at the dialogue all mentioned participants were marked individually as a gossip 
target. Those dialogues were not tagged as gossip where the person whom the speakers were talking about although was 
not present but was not a participant or former participant of the gameshow (like acquaintances, family relatives, and so 
on). These discourses were mentioned as storytelling later on in our topic model. 
For the analysis of our corpora we used Magyarlanc (translates to “Hungarian chain”) which is a linguistic analyzer tool 
developed for syntactic analysis of Hungarian language. With the usage of the Magyarlanc toolkit, we were able to conduct 
POS-tagging of the corpus. It is important to note that this tool can also be used for segmentation, morphological analysis, 
and dependency parsing of Hungarian texts [
Zsibrita13
]. These analytic directions are also integral part of planned further 
analysis of our unique corpus. 
To have a deeper insight into gossip’s manifestations in spontaneous speech situations, we used annotation marks during 
the transcription process of our corpora. The annotators used annotation codes to mark the speech about a third person who 
is not present during the conversation (gossip). During the annotation of gossip the sender and the receiver could be 
identified by the annotators as well as indicating the names of the participants and the target of gossip. During a dialogue, 
the annotators could also identify other participants who remained silent during the conversation but their presence could 
be perceived by the annotator. This tag also provides us the possibility to measure the number of persons present while 
gossiping. During the transcription process the annotators indicated the exact time interval of speech by using timestamps 
to sign which participant was talking and for how long. Name tags provides us information about turn-taking and 
simultaneous speaking situations of the speakers. All tags that we used during the annotation period was thoroughly 
documented and described for the annotators in a user guide with examples for tag categories. In order to ensure the quality 
of the corpus, we also used annotation codes that indicates incomprehensible, unidentifiable speech. 
For the purpose to detect conversation behaviors when gossiping in everyday informal communication situations we 
analyzed several types of verbal and non-verbal emotions of the speakers. Annotation marks identified by our annotators 
to explore the speaker’s non-verbal signs of emotions during the conversations were: laughter, crying, sighing, etc. 
In our paper we analyzed verbal emotions semantically with emotion and sentiment analysis as well (the dictionaries 
used were developed by Precognox Company)3. For the emotion analysis we used a six categories dictionary based on 
Ekman’s and Friesen’s [
Ekman69
] theory. 
The quality and the compatibility of the corpus is measured in several ways and in multiple dimensions. This was done 
by automatized means but also with qualitative, random-like monitoring. The work quality of the annotators were measured 
by giving them the same text files as to compare them by means of matching the transcribed text’s accuracy, the annotation 
tags, name tags, and timestamp usage which are divided into sub-dimensions for more accurate feedback. We compared 
annotators by comparing their work to each other and by using a reference annotator as well. 
These measures are continuously monitored during the corpus construction and documented thoroughly. To measure text 
similarity we used cosine similarity and Levenshtein distance. In the case of serious quality differences (if an annotator’s 
quality assurance match was under 70%) the text file was re-transcribed and re-annotated. We provided individual feedback 
to annotators in all of the quality assurance dimension by time-to-time. With these quality assurance tools we were able to 
monitor 20 hours of the whole corpus. 
3 
Research Directions
In our first research direction we examine what were the participants of the gameshow talking about. We assumed that 
majority of their speech is about other people. Analyzing spontaneous speech Levin and Arluke
[
Levin85
] concluded that 
the topic and subject of gossip was mainly concerned about personal habits, manners, appearance, and role performance, 
and both men and women focused their gossiping conversations mainly on topics such as dating and sex. An important part 
of our research is that the other people that they talk about can be outside of the closed environment they are in, and can be 
fellow players. While the reason they talk about other people can be to set examples and norms, gossip about other players 
can be motivated by reputational motives. 
In our next two research directions, we examine the quantitative differences between the dialogue segments assuming 
that story telling about other people differs from gossiping about fellow players, and also differs from other speeches 
containing other topics. 
Gossip is an evaluative talk and is usually about a third party, who has engaged in a past event and is not present. Gossip 
is usually among a few individuals [
DiFonzo07
]. We assume that gossip will be associated with less speakers than non-
gossip. 
Gossip is also confidential. We assume that during gossip, less people are present in the room, regardless of the number 
of participants. Gossiping entails confidential topics usually occurring among people close to each other [Shimanoff85]. 
Close acquaintances or friends presumably speak longer. Also, the level of confidentiality required for gossiping takes 
longer time to form. We assume that segments that contain gossip are longer than non-gossip segments. 
Previous studies on emotions occurring during informal communication showed that emotions are more frequently present 
than in everyday conversations [Shimanoff85]. When analyzing emotions as conversation behavior in gossiping situations, 
negative emotions exhibit a tendency to appear more frequently than positive ones. 
3
We would like to thank Precognox for providing us their sentiment and emotion dictionaries
These emotions are expressing most frequently anger, stress or sadness by the speaker. By looking at the subject of gossip 
and the way of communication mechanisms that speakers use, references show that gossiping while using negative emotions 
are more likely in an indirect form of speech. [
Anderson98
]. We assume that during gossip, people express more anger and 
sadness. We expect more negative emotions in verbal and non-verbal expression of the players. 
4 
Methodology 
This chapter gives an overview of the text preprocessing steps and the analytic strategy used. The number of unique terms 
were reduced using lemmatization, a unique stopword dictionary, and frequency-based filtering. The preprocessed data was 
then used as an input for topic modeling with Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). 
4.1 
Text preprocessing
The corpus has undergone multiple stages of preprocessing to prepare the transcripts for text analysis. The pipeline 
described below has been automated to handle the increasingly large corpus. 
The analysis of texts written in agglutinative languages like Hungarian requires the lemmatization of the corpus in 
question due to a potentially large number of words with similar meanings. We have chosen the widely used Magyarlánc 
software to lemmatize our sizable corpus. This tool enabled us to implement this step in a time-effective and scalable way. 
A well-grounded stopword dictionary is key to preparing a corpus for text analysis. The Hungarian stopword list of the 
Snowball project [Porter01] was chosen as the basis of our extended dictionary. Using the popular Magyarlánc tool for 
morphological analysis and part-of-speech tagging of Hungarian corpora [Zsibrita13], multiple additions were made to the 
base list. We excluded all the words from our corpus that were not categorized into a known morphological category by 
Magyarlánc (represented by “X” in the program’s output). Adverbs, apart from verbal adverbs, were also discarded along 
with adpositions, auxiliary verbs, interjections, particles, determiners, coordinating and subordinating conjunctions. A 
manual check by researchers ensured that foreign words used as a normal, everyday part of the language and slang words 
incorrectly categorized by Magyarlánc were not unnecessarily discarded. We also added other nonsensical words to our 
stop word list identified during the manual checks. In the end, our stopword dictionary contained more than 2000 lemmas. 
4.2 
LDA 
As the next step, the document-term matrix of unigram counts was obtained. Even though text preprocessing has left a 
relatively low number of unique lemmas, terms appearing in less than 5 documents and words present in more than 60% of 
texts were also removed to discard overly rare and overly frequent unigrams. Digits and punctuation characters were also 
excluded. The final document-term matrix had 12.961 documents and 8.530 terms. 
We have made the decision to use the method of latent dirichlet allocation (LDA) to uncover the underlying topics in our 
corpus. LDA models the term-topic and topic-document probabilities in a generative way with a Dirichlet distribution as a 
prior, estimating non-exclusive topic memberships for each document in the corpus. Gensim version 3.2.0, a topic modeling 
library for Python 3, was used to construct the document-term matrix and for LDA modeling [Rehurek10]. We randomly 
split our corpus into train, test, and validation set with 50%, 25%, 25% of data, respectively. Our models were configured 
to use an asymmetric prior learned from the data (alpha parameter set to “auto”) and to take 40 passes through the training 
data. Other parameters were set to their default values. We decided to use 50 topics, a number providing coherent topics 
and still enabling qualitative assessment by researchers. The average semantic coherence metric as defined by Mimno et al 
[Mimno05] was -3.31. 
During the process of model building and choosing the number of topics, we relied on metrics such as logarithmic 
perplexity (measured on the test and validation set). Jaccard distances and Kullback-Leibler differences between 
consecutive training steps, as well as coherence metric by Mimno et al. [Mimno05]. The Gensim Python library provides 
great functionality to monitor the process of LDA training. 
5 
Results 
In this section, we detail our analytic results. After estimating our topic model, we gave a qualitative interpretation to each 
one of the 50 topics based on the term weights as well as attempting to identify possible connections between different 
properties of the individual documents and the corresponding topic ratios. 
Our results include 50 topics that are present in our speech segments. For our first research direction, we were able to 
categorize these topics by their main theme. 24 of these topics included speech about everyday life, or so called ‘internal 
issues’ like kitchen and food, clothes, body care and so on (Figure 2.1). 10 of the topics seem to be about the entertainment 
show of which the speakers were part. Discussions about the selection process, duels, and other organized games can be 
discovered. In other 12 topics, they mostly told stories about other people, who are not part of the participants (Figure 2.2). 
Two topics were distinctively about each other, called later ‘gossip topics’, two of the most coherent ones. The other topics 
were mixed or hard to categorize. Topics were categorized as “gossip topics”, if the number of gossip annotation tags provided 
by human transcribers were significantly high. 
For demonstrative purposes, we selected the two topics with gossip (Figure 1), one topic about everyday issues, and one 
‘story topic’ about people from the ‘outside’ (Figure 2). The most important terms in the two gossip topics are represented by 
the following word clouds. 
Figure 1: 
Wordclouds of the most important terms in the two topics with gossip. Words were translated from Hungarian to English. 
Word sizes are proportional to LDA weights. (Source: own visualization) 
As we can see, topics with gossip contain the names of some of the participants with a high weight. These words most 
probably describe the actions of these individuals and feelings or actions associated with them.
Some of the most important terms in the two non-gossip topics are the following: 
Figure 2:
Wordclouds of the most important terms in the two miscellaneous topics. Words were translated from Hungarian to English. 
Word sizes are proportional to LDA weights. (Source: own visualization) 
Words associated with food are well represented in the first topic, while the second is filled with terms referencing outside 
parties (such as family members or celebrities) as well as their actions and associated feelings, but the second topic was not 
labeled as a “gossip topic”, since the number of gossip annotation tags were not sufficient. 
For our second and third research direction, we wanted to see how segments that contain gossip differ quantitatively from 
other, non-gossip segments. We analyzed, how the appearance of certain topics correlated with other characteristics and 
variables from our segments (Table 1). 
Topics containing gossip about each other are distinct from other non-gossip topics, including those that are about people 
from the outside (as family, friends, acquaintances, celebrities). 
In contrary to our assumption, texts that contain gossip are not necessarily longer than their non-gossip counterparts. The 
ratio of gossip statements, coded by annotators is significantly higher in our gossip topics. As we assumed, in one of the 
gossip topics, less people were present during the conversation, and in both of them the number of individual speakers is 
significantly lower. Gossip topics usually contain names, personal pronouns, simple verbs as ‘say’, ‘go’ or ‘think’ and verbs 
related to expressions of own emotions such as ‘feel’ and ‘understand’. 
In general, in conversations containing gossip, the participants underused the words from our emotion dictionaries. As 
expected, they used significantly more anger in both gossip topics, but less joy related words were present in them. Words 
that express sadness were more likely to be present at the internal issues category then in the gossip categories. 
Overall, during gossip conversations, the participants expressed less words that have positive connotation, but more with 
negative connotation. Interestingly, story topics in general contain less anger, harsher nonverbal emotions and, in some cases, 
much more positive dictionary. The participants underused the elements of the nonverbal communication during the 
conversations that contain gossip. They especially underused forms of nonverbal communication as laughter or crying. 
6
Conclusion 
In this paper, we provide some insight into our analysis of a unique, large, and annotated corpus of spontaneous speeches 
collected during a Hungarian entertainment programme, where participants were placed in a monitored, closed environment 
for a relatively long period of time. Our analytic strategy was aimed to provide an overview of the dominant topics discussed 
by the players and to identify relationships between important characteristics (such as topic membership, emotion, or number 
of participants) and the prevalence of gossip, a widespread activity in human groups associated with many functions. 
The manually transcribed and annotated corpus was heavily preprocessed to fit our analytic needs, which entailed, amongst 
others, the development of a specialized stopword dictionary. The preprocessing step was followed by estimating topic models 
with the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) method. The identified topic universe underwent qualitative interpretation by 
researchers and quantitative relationships were also calculated between features of interest (such as annotation codes 
indicating gossip, the number of people present, etc.) and emotions identified with emotion dictionaries. 
We can conclude that gossiping is different from storytelling and other social topics. Gossip is not only about inform people 
or to set norms in a community, but it might have a personal impact on the individual with unleashing anger or distress. It is 
also possible, that it differs from non-gossip because it might be used for reputational purposes. In our analysis it is also a 
surprise that although we can notice a huge dimension of words of anger while gossiping we cannot notice any non-verbal 
emotion during this type of communication. In the only category where we can find the usage of non-verbal emotions is the 
‘story’ category where participants mainly talk about their outside acquaintances. 
Table 1: Example of topics and variables by segments, where segments are coherent units of speech or conversation without 
silence longer than 2 seconds 
Segment characteristics 
internal 
issues 
story 
gossip1 
gossip2 
length (in rows) 
-0,074 
-0,054 
-0,018 
-0,076 
gossip ratio 
-0,064 
0,027 
0,202 
0,235 
people present at the conversation 
0,081 
non sign. 
non sign. 
-0,041 
people speaking at the conversation 
non sign. 
-0,037 
-0,012 
-0,051 
turn taking at conversation 
non sign. 
-0,037 
non sign. 
-0,047 
ratio of "joyful" words 
-0,016 
-0,036 
-0,058 
-0,091 
ratio of words associated with 
sadness 
0,016 
non sign. 
non sign. 
-0,037 
ratio of words associated with 
anger 
non sign. 
-0,021 
0,018 
0,024 
positive_ratio 
-0,023 
-0,045 
-0,067 
-0,092 
negative_ratio 
-0,02 
-0,051 
-0,058 
-0,072 
ratio of non-verbal annotation tags 
-0,026 
0,014 
-0,046 
-0,105 
the ratio of laughter annotation 
tags 
-0,042 
non sign. 
-0,073 
-0,123 
the ratio of crying annotation tags 
0,033 
0,078 
non sign. 
-0,048 
References 
[Anderson98]
K. J. Anderson., C. Leaper. Emotion Talk Between Same-and Mixed-Gender Friends. Form and Function. 
Journal of Language and Social Psychology. 17(4), pp. 419-448.
1998. 
[Bak14]
J. Bak., C.Y. Lin., A. Oh. Self-disclosure topic model for classifying and analyzing Twitter conversations. 
In Pang, B. W. Daelemans, (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing Doha, Qatar: Association for Computational Linguistics. pp. 1986-1996. 
2014. 
[Blei05]
D. M. Blei., A. Y. J. Ng. Latent dirichlet allocation. 
Journal of Machine Learning Research. pp. 3:993–
1022.
2003. 
[Bunt05]
G. van de Bunt., R. P. M. Wittek., M. C. de Klepper. The Evolution of Intra-Organizational Trust 
Networks. The Case of a German Paper Factory: An Empirical Test of Six Trust Mechanisms. 
International Sociology, 20(3): pp. 339-369. 
2005. 
[Crain12]
S. P. Crain., K. Zhou., S. Yang., H. Zha. Dimensionality reduction and topic modeling: from latent 
semantic indexing to latent dirichlet allocation and beyond. 
In: Aggarwal, C.C., Zhai, C. (eds.): Mining 
Text Data. Springer-Verlag, New York. pp. 129-161.
2012. 
[DiFonzo07]
N. DiFonzo., P. Bordia. Rumor, gossip and urban legends. 
Diogenes, 54(1), 19-35.
2007. 
[Dunbar04]
R. Dunbar. Gossip in evolutionary perspective. 
Review of general psychology, 8(2), 100.
2004. 
[Feinberg14]
M. Feinberg., R. Willer., M. Schultz. Gossip and ostracism promote cooperation in groups. 
Psychological 
science, 25(3), pp. 656-664.
2014. 
[Hess06]
N. H. Hess., E. H. Hagen. Psychological adaptations for assessing gossip veracity. 
Review of general 
psychology, 8(2), 78. 
2006. 
[Ekman69]
P. Ekman., W.V. Friesen. The repertoire or nonverbal behavior: categories, origins, usage, and coding. 
Semiotica, 1, pp. 49–98.
1969. 
[Jones80]
D. Jones. Gossip: Notes on women's oral culture. 
Women's Studies International Quarterly. Volume 3, 
Issues 2–3, Pages 193-198.
1980. 
[Kurland00]
N. B. Kurland., L. H. Pelled. Passing the word: Toward a model of gossip and power in the workplace. 
Academy of Management Review, 25(2), pp. 428-438.
2000. 
[Levin85]
J. Levin., A. Arluke. An exploratory analysis of sex differences in gossip. 
Sex Roles. 12, (3-4).
1985. 
[Lucas15]
C. Lucas., R.A. Nielsen., M.E. Roberts., B. M. Stewart., A. Storer., D. Tingley. Computer-assisted text 
analysis for comparative politics. 
In: Political Analysis 23(2), pp. 254-277. 
2015. 
[Mitra12]
T. Mitra., E. Gilbert. "Have you heard?: How gossip flows through workplace email", 
Proc. AAAI Int. 
Conf. Weblogs Soc. Media, pp. 242–249.
2012. 
[Michelson04]
G. Michelson., M. V. Suchitra. Do loose lips sink ships? The meaning, antecedents and consequences of 
rumour and gossip in organisations. Corporate Communications: 
An International Journal, 9(3), pp. 189-
201. 
2004. 
[Mills10]
C. Mills. Experiencing gossip: The foundations for a theory of embedded organizational gossip. 
Group 
& organization management.
2010. 
[Mimno11]
D. Mimno., H.M. Wallach., E. Talley., M. Leenders. A. McCallum. Optimizing semantic coherence in 
topic models. 
In: Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. pp. 262-272. 
2011. 
[Nowak01]
M. A. Nowak., K. Sigmund. Evolution of indirect reciprocity. 
Nature, 437(7063), pp. 1291-1298.
2005. 
[Porter10].
M. F. Porter. Snowball. A language for stemming algorithms. 
In: http://snowball.tartarus.org/texts/introduction.html. 
2001. 
[Rehurek10]
R. Rehurek., P. Sojka. Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. 
Proceedings of the 
LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks. pp. 45-50. 
2010. 
[Shimanoff85]
S. 
B. 
Shimanoff. 
Expressing 
Emotions 
in 
Words: 
Verbal 
Patterns 
of 
Interaction. 
Journal 
of 
Communication, 35, pp. 16–31. 
1985. 
[Tholander03] 
M. Tholander. Pupils' gossip as remedial action
. Discourse studies, 5(1), pp. 101-128.
2003. 
[Zsibrita13] 
J. Zsibrita., V. Vincze., R. Farkas. Magyarlanc: A toolkit for morphological and dependency parsing of 
Hungarian. 
Szeged.
2013. 
