DML 2010
Wojtek Sylwestrzak; José Borbinha; Thierry Bouche; Aleksander Nowiński; Petr Sojka
EuDML—Towards the European Digital Mathematics Library
In: Petr Sojka (ed.): Towards a Digital Mathematics Library. Paris, France, July 7-8th, 2010.
Masaryk University Press, Brno, Czech Republic, 2010. pp. 11--26.
Persistent URL:
http://dml.cz/dmlcz/702569
Terms of use:
© Masaryk University, 2010
Institute of Mathematics of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic provides access to
digitized documents strictly for personal use. Each copy of any part of this document must
contain these
Terms of use
.
This paper has been digitized, optimized for electronic delivery and stamped
with digital signature within the project
DML-CZ: The Czech Digital
Mathematics Library
http://project.dml.cz
EuDML—Towards
the European Digital Mathematics Library
Architecture and Design
Wojtek Sylwestrzak
1
, José Borbinha
2
, Thierry Bouche
3
, Aleksander Nowi ´
nski
1
,
and Petr Sojka
4
1
Interdisciplinary Center for Mathematical and Computational Modelling
University of Warsaw, ul. Pawi ´
nskiego 5A, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland
W.Sylwestrzak@icm.edu.pl
,
A.Nowinski@icm.edu.pl
2
Instituto Superior Técnico: Computer Science Department, Lisbon, Portugal
jlb@ist.utl.pt
3
Institut Fourier (UMR 5582) & Cellule Mathdoc (UMS 5638), Université Joseph-Fourier
(Grenoble 1), B.P. 74, 38402 Saint-Martin d’Hères, France
thierry.bouche@ujf-grenoble.fr
4
Masaryk University, Faculty of Informatics
Botanická 68a, 602 00 Brno, Czech Republic
sojka@fi.muni.cz
Abstract.
The paper describes the background, the expected functional-
ities,
and the architecture design goals of the European Digital Mathe-
matics Library (Eu-DML), an infrastructure system aimed to integrate the
mathematical contents available online throughout Europe, allowing for
both extensive and specialized mathematics resource discovery. The three
years long project to build the EuDML, partially funded by the European
Commission, started in February 2010.
Key words:
bibliography crosslinking, document ranking, digital libraries,
DML,
EuDML,
information systems,
information retrieval,
citations
discovery and extraction,
mathematical
content
search,
mathematical
metadata, mathematics indexing, REPOX, similarity analysis, text mining,
YADDA, Web 2.0
1
Introduction
Mathematics is a specific discipline in many respects. One often hears that all
a mathematician needs to work is a pencil and a piece of paper.
This is not
entirely the truth. One of the unique qualities of mathematics is its intrinsic
dependence on previous works—one of the basic tool of a mathematician is
thus a library. Similarly, many other disciplines of science and research depend
on mathematical
knowledge,
and for them,
too,
access to a mathematical
library is a requisite.
In modern times,
this translates into the requirement
of online availability of the mathematical content. This is why the numerous
local initiatives first to digitize and then to make local mathematical content
available spontaneously started and are still active in many countries. However,
Petr Sojka (editor): DML 2010, Towards a Digital Mathematics Library, pp. 11–26.
c
Masaryk University, 2010
ISBN 978-80-210-5242-0
12
W. Sylwestrzak, J. Borbinha, T. Bouche, A. Nowi ´
nski, P. Sojka
for a number of reasons,
it is necessary to provide an integrated access to
all
the accumulated material,
especially because in mathematics,
unlike in
many other disciplines,
the language of a publication is to a lesser extent a
barrier. A mathematician looking for a certain theorem proof is still concerned
about the place, date or language of the publication, but to a lesser extent than
researchers in other, less universal disciplines. Therefore it is essential that all
the worldwide mathematical content, although distributed and heterogeneous
in nature, is presented in a seamless way, through a unified interface suitable
for the mathematics search purposes, as well as future reliable reference.
This claim already impulsed a large array of international activities since
year 2001,
when the DML concept emerged from pioneering work by John
Ewing,
Philippe Tondeur and Keith Dennis,
who initiated a meeting in San
Diego (California) in January 2002, where mathematical societies, digitisation
projects, academic publishers reckoned the need for this infrastructure [
22
,
18
].
Since then, however, no actual progress towards integration of heterogeneous
collections has been achieved.
A one-year (2002–2003) planning project [
13
]
coordinated by Cornell University Library was funded by the U.S.
National
Science Foundation (NSF)
“toward the establishment
of
a comprehensive,
international,
distributed collection of
digital
information and published
knowledge in mathematics”,
with a steering committee that
happened to
be mostly European.
Most of the conclusions from that group are still valid
today:
the need for standardization and coordination,
the identification of
intellectual
property rights and conflict of interests among stakeholders as
principal inhibitors.
In 2005,
the Moore Foundation was approached by the
American Mathematical Society (AMS) and considered funding a gigantic World
DML,
but faced the same inhibiting factors.
However,
while no consensus
could be reached in the areas of
ownership of
the mathematical
heritage,
or governance of the DML,
and no global funding scheme seemed realistic,
numerous digitisation projects were running or launched, most of which were
based in Europe.
The International Mathematical Union endorsed in 2006 a
generous text [
23
] written by its Committee on Electronic Information and
Communication (CEIC), but although this probably served as an incentive to
launch new local DML projects, nothing happened in the area of integration
although the EMANI project was a pioneering attempt in this direction [32].
The European Mathematical Society (EMS) was a driving force in many
of these efforts:
it wrote an Expression of Interest to the European Union to
support an application for the European chapter of the DML as an integrated
infrastructure in the 5
th
Framework programme.
In 2009,
it
contacted the
European Science Foundation which considered supporting a foresight study
on a European DML, which showed that almost a decade after the first attempts,
we were more or less back to the NSF planning project situation.
One of the reasons for this situation is that commercial
publishers had
considered for a while using public funding to get their backfiles digitised,
and were open to new business models (like JSTOR’s moving wall,
or even
NUMDAM’s moving wall) if that happened. But no funding source of the size
EuDML—Towards the European Digital Mathematics Library
13
needed ever surfaced,
and each publisher found its own resources,
some of
them public (usually at a national level, often associated with some mandate
for eventual open access in NUMDAM’s line), but many publishers invested
their own money and thus expected some return,
and started to view DML
projects as competitors.
We believe that this situation will not be resolved by itself, and therefore that
scientists will still lack the necessary infrastructure for handling the reference
mathematical corpus, unless a core group of stakeholders takes up the challenge
to set
up an actual
system going beyond the current
individual
projects’
boundaries. This core group must have a critical mass in content, know-how, and
a sufficient organisational diversity. They must take a pro-active approach and
set the networking infrastructure, standards and policies so that we can further
build on the current state of the art and aim at comprehensiveness in content
while expanding geographically.
We formed a consortium,
and claim that,
together with its associated partners (EMS and Göttingen University Library), it
does form such a core group in position of making the first paradigmatic shift
in this area, thanks to the support it obtained from the European Commission.
2
Overview
Despite the lack of success in building a global Digital Mathematics Library
(DML) infrastructure [
5
,
7
,
6
,
8
], many local initiatives continue their development,
and many new DML activities started [
2
,
4
,
30
].
It is estimated that over 200
thousand items are already openly available online in European national
projects,
of which Germany provides around 85,000,
France 60,000,
Czech
Republic 27,000, Russia 18,000, Poland: 13,000, Spain 6,000, Switzerland 5,000,
Serbia 4,500, and Portugal 2,000. A lot of mathematical contents is also ready in
digital form owned by commercial publishers like Springer, or Elsevier, these
alas are not yet freely available,
mostly due to the restricted access polices
assumed by the publishers, who in most cases are also the copyright owners.
Finally, a still unidentified number of publications may be available in electronic
form in institutional repositories, archived there by their authors (with unknown
scientific validation status).
Despite the impressive volume, the currently available digital mathematics
content is often difficult to access,
through a number of isolated interfaces,
not registered, difficult to find or virtually inaccessible. Often not adequately
curated, some of the content may be available in volatile collections and at the
risk of perishing.
A group of European stakeholders in DML joined their efforts to draft a
project to build a common DML infrastructure for mathematical knowledge
access in Europe.
The three years long project,
named EuDML,
officially
started in February 2010 [
9
]. The EuDML will establish a pilot implementation
of an integrated mathematics digital
library system allowing for seamless
access for otherwise dispersed digital material of the partners and associates.
A comprehensive partner institutions list
is available at
the project’s web
14
W. Sylwestrzak, J. Borbinha, T. Bouche, A. Nowi ´
nski, P. Sojka
site,
http://www.eudml.eu/
.
The partners include national
DML operators
and mathematical
content
providers
(among contributed collections
are:
NUMDAM [
21
],
CEDRAM [
11
],
Zentralblatt MATH [
20
],
EMIS’ ELibM [
12
],
DML-CZ [
1
],
DML-PL [
37
],
DML-E
[
19
],
DML-PT [
3
],
EDP Sciences’
math
journals,
Bulgarian and Hellenic DMLs [
10
,
15
]),
digital
library technology
developers (IST
5
developed REPOX [
28
], ICM
6
YADDA [
36
] and MU
7
several
other tools [
27
,
1
]), a scientific publisher (EDP Sciences), and experienced service
providers (ICM providing large scale content services for years, FIZ
8
and CMD
9
as well, in the area of mathematical literature). A professional company (MML
10
)
will design the user interface. The European Mathematical Society, will assess
the usefulness of the system and the University Library of Göttingen will
contribute ERAM and RusDML books and journals [14,33,29].
The fact that the available digital
maths corpus is already considerable
provides an opportunity to reach the critical mass needed for wide acceptance
of the EuDML infrastructure. The quality and scientific relevance of the freely
available content, especially in Europe, is a strong asset. Many EuDML partners
have been active for years, making digitally available a substantial portion of
the mathematical treasuries produced or published mainly in Europe since
the XVII
th
century. This is of course only one of the necessary conditions, the
others being the overall quality of the proposed tools and solutions, and their
acceptance by users.
3
Design Goals
The primary goal of the system is to provide a “one-stop-shop” unified access
gateway to the distributed mathematical
content
with innovative services
tailored for a wide range of users. At the same time, the system is expected
to play the role of an infrastructure solution, forming the basis of the future
mathematical
knowledge management
and provisioning platform.
To this
end,
the system design has to allow for future seamless integration with
relevant mathematics tools as well as with existing and planned knowledge
infrastructures.
While it
is
envisaged that
the future of
the knowledge
management will be based on open access principles, and the initial versions of
the system will focus on open content handling, it should also be capable of
dealing with restricted licenses, and cater for selected intermediate and hybrid
solutions, including the moving wall model. EuDML basic policy is to handle
only content for which some kind of moving wall license has been obtained:
5
Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal.
6
Interdisciplinary Center for Mathematical and Computational Modelling, Warsaw,
Poland.
7
Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
8
The Berlin editorial office of Fachinformationszentrum Karlsruhe (FIZ) is producing
the Zentralblatt MATH Database and the digital library of journals ELibM.
9
Cellule Mathdoc, Grenoble, France.
10
Made Media Ltd. is a digital media agency based in Birmingham, UK.
EuDML—Towards the European Digital Mathematics Library
15
this secures eventual open access to the content that is curated in the project,
which appears to be a rather popular and efficient model for mathematical
literature, given its life span. Besides the metadata, the system will also have the
possibility to store local fulltext copies, both for speedy text mining and fulltext
index rebuild purposes. This might also help setting up eventual archiving of
the curated corpus.
The key features of the EuDML platform are its extensibility, allowing easy
addition of new services (and content), and its scalability in many dimensions,
including the content’s volume, content’s structure, number of services, number
of concurrent users,
etc.,
without performance or reliability degradation.
To
this end,
the system will be designed in a modular,
distributed architecture,
allowing to replace or provide alternative modules realizing the same or similar
functions in the future.
The EuDML system will
enable seamless access to the DML resources
distributed through the heterogeneous repositories of the partners and other
potential content contributors. A number of specific functional requirements are
being defined, including mathematics-specific content support for consistent
mathematical
data presentation (of
various provenance),
or mathematical
formulae search.
While the initial version of the system may be centralized, the requirement
for reliability results in a need for a subsequent migration towards a fully
distributed architecture that would allow for a redundancy and limiting single
points of failure and at the same time would provide a better overall scalability.
For this reason, the architecture design has to assume a distributed operations
model from the very beginning, even if the first prototypes are expected to be
deployed in a simplified environment. Nevertheless, it is absolutely essential
that the system in all its versions is able to work in an environment of distributed
document and metadata sources, supporting heterogeneous content providers.
OAI-PMH is a primary means of content harvesting but other methods are
going to be considered and implemented throughout the system’s lifetime.
Besides the import capabilities,
EuDML will provide access to its stored
contents to external
services,
through specified access interfaces.
A secure
integration with commercial content providers services, and possibly also with
selected federated authentication systems is also envisaged.
While security
may not
seem to be the critical
feature of
a DML system,
certain aspects
require careful consideration. As all distributed systems relying on the open
Internet for inter-process communication, EuDML by its nature may be prone
to service impersonification and denial of service (DoS) type attacks.
While
service-to-service authentication and authorisation mechanisms will
have
to be implemented to guarantee the system’s integrity,
service and data
backup-restore and redundant
load balancing functions will
guarantee its
adequate availability.
In order to be able to handle non-free content,
special
care will be paid to access control and access accounting functions.
Finally,
user authentication will allow end users to customize the work environments
attached to their accounts, annotate content, and use the system’s community
16
W. Sylwestrzak, J. Borbinha, T. Bouche, A. Nowi ´
nski, P. Sojka
Fig. 1. EuDML functional vision
cooperation and other Web 2.0 functions. The registered authors should be able
to claim their works and create their own bibliography portfolios.
The end user features include an efficient
way of
content
presentation
through a custom designed web user interface integrated with Web 2.0 content
enrichment features.
Besides the common search/browse/display scenarios,
EuDML will offer the user a number of personalisation features, community
and collaboration support services, and content enrichment tools (annotations,
personal keywords, personal ranking etc.).
The initial functional expectations of the system, presented in the diagram
in Figure 1,
conceptually consist of a metadata repository,
a search engine,
a metadata enhancer,
an association analyser,
annotation and accessibility
functions and of course the interfaces.
Each of these abstract concepts will
actually materialize as a number of functional components in the functional
specification,
and may eventually consist of a range of different tools and
services, that will be improved and extended over time, and that will be able to
handle different aspects of the expected functions. The metadata repository will
provide the central point of reference for all the managed contents. It will work
directly with an OAI-PMH harvester to ingest repositories’ content descriptions,
will be able to map the metadata into the internal EuDML schema, will provide
item identifier resolution facilities, and store the metadata, and a copy of the
actual fulltext content when appropriate. The performance and the quality of
responses of the search service will directly influence user experience. Therefore,
particularly this service has to be reliable, scalable and customized to fulfil user
expectations. Apart from the common search functionality, innovative solutions
for searching in mathematical contents will be sought. The metadata enhancer
function will consist in a collection of tools that each will contribute to expand
or complete the existing items’
metadata,
depending on the improvements
needed. These will range from applying OCR over full texts, adding key words
or multilingual
metadata by merging information from different databases
EuDML—Towards the European Digital Mathematics Library
17
when an item happens to have such non-redundant description,
generating
MathML for mathematical expressions, etc. The association analyser will be able
to detect, analyse and record relations between individual items. The annotation
component will provide mechanisms to attach new material to individual items
in the repositories and maintain this new material. The accessibility component
will provide support for enhanced accessibility of items,
if required,
before
presentation to end users. Finally, the user and system interfaces will provide
access to the collected resources on different levels both to human and machine
users, respectively. They will also provide interfaces for integration with other
knowledge infrastructure and third party services.
The authors encourage the community to discuss the presented system’s
features and provide suggestions for additional functionalities, considered to
be vital for the broadly defined platform’s usability.
4
System Architecture
Based on a detailed functional requirements specification, the EuDML system’s
architecture is going to be designed. The extensibility, scalability and reliability
requirements lead to an eventually fully distributed,
platform independent
(Java based) solution.
While the general architecture design will follow the
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) paradigm, the communication layer will
remain abstract, so that individual services will be able to communicate through
different adequate means, including possible direct connection when deployed
in a single location (host). On the other hand, universal SOAP communication
will
be maintained as the default
for flexibility and compatibility reasons,
and more lightweight
remote communication (e.g.
REST or other content-
driven) will be also possible, where required. For this purpose a layered service
structure will be adopted, presented in more detail at the end of this section on
page 20.
The performance requirement results in the need of a careful
selection
of critical
processing components,
and where possible,
mature and proven
technologies will be used, with which the partners have adequate experience.
The additional
benefit of using the partner developed technologies will
be
the system’s sustainability after the end of the project,
when the partners
responsible for individual
services will
be able to continue curating them
by further developing the relevant software code,
while keeping EuDML’s
compatibility and other specific requirements in mind.
4.1
Modular Design
The modular design principle will pertain not only to the backend services but
to the user interface as well, allowing for existence of alternative user interfaces,
or embedding EuDML portlets in third party services, where required.
Each of the functional
modules presented in the previous section shall
be realized by means of
a separate service or a group of
services acting
18
W. Sylwestrzak, J. Borbinha, T. Bouche, A. Nowi ´
nski, P. Sojka
Metadata
Enriching
Process management services
(indexing, analysing, enriching etc.)
Authoritative services
Metadata
(+
annotations
)
Store
Remoting 
interface
Content
Storage
Service
Remoting 
interface
Indexing and enriching services
Search
Service
Remoting 
interface
Structured
Browse
Service
Remoting 
interface
Citation
Service
Remoting 
interface
Other 
services
Remoting 
interface
Web User Interface
OAI-PMH
access
Other 
interfaces
Data
Harvesting
And
Import
Annotations
Fig. 2. EuDML core and extension services
together. At the design stage each service will be characterized by its formal
contract definition, which will be subsequently used for testing purposes (and
particularly for the regression tests in a continuous integration environment).
At the same time, a service’s contract will define its behaviour and ascertain
the fulfilment of the desired functional requirements.
Many technologies and solutions that
are required in EuDML already
exist
either developed by the project
partners or elsewhere,
and in many
areas new developments will not be required. However, a careful design and
evaluation of
the alternatives will
always have to be carried out.
Also,
in
order to assure a proper follow-up,
the evolving environment will
have to
be taken into account,
and EuDML will not be limited to its initial specific
functional requirements only,
but will also conceive other requirements for
wider interoperability. Where possible, the system backend modules will be
based on existing partner-developed code of proven and deployed services, in
order to economize the development effort, capitalize on partners’ experience
and secure the future sustainable development.
The system, based on Service Oriented Architecture, will consist of a set
of core services and a number of extension or enriching services.
The core
services are defined as a set of services required and sufficient for the basic
EuDML—Towards the European Digital Mathematics Library
19
system operation. They include the publication metadata store, the indexing
and the search services, the content storage system and structured publication
browsing services.
The architecture concept outline is presented in Figure 2
on the preceding page. The core services realize the functions of the metadata
repository, and search engine, described in the previous section.
4.2
The Metadata Store
The Metadata Store will be composed of several separate services acting to-
gether: a Metadata Repository Manager; a Storage Manager; and a Metadata
Registry.
The Metadata Repository Manager REPOX has been chosen.
RE-
POX [
28
] is a framework developed in the scope of the project TELplus and
already deployed in the TEL central service and in several TEL data provider
libraries (it also is being redesigned in order to be used by Europeana project).
The YADDA Storage Service is our metadata storage tool of choice. YADDA [
35
]
is a service oriented distributed digital content management and provisioning
platform, originally developed for Polish national Virtual Library of Science
project, with its core components successfully deployed in several large Euro-
pean production content infrastructures (e.g. DRIVER [
25
], or OpenAIRE [
24
]).
REPOX and YADDA are capable of managing a large number of data sources
and storing large quantities of heterogeneous records, with additional version
control support, tagging and other required control features. This will allow
storing not only bibliographical records in various schemas but also user cre-
ated content referring to the custom work. An important requirement also will
be the assignment of a persistent identifier to each entity (metadata record or
document) and the related resolution service able to point to a local copy and
back to the original resource’s locations.
Despite the fact that EuDML will be using its internal common metadata
schema, it is anticipated that multiple different metadata patterns will be used
by different content providers and data sources,
and these will
have to be
reversibly mapped onto the internal data structure. That implies the Metadata
Store will have to support adapting the different forms of metadata that each
provider has about their items to the common format required by the EuDML.
For that purpose,
the Metadata Repository also will include,
in its internal
architecture, a Metadata Registry (MDR). Besides the traditional references for
this work [
16
,
17
], the results of the XMDR project [
34
] will be also considered.
For the purpose of the EuDML Metadata Registry, the MDR technology already
developed in the TELplus project and in deployment in TEL will be evaluated,
it is being made more generic and robust in the scope of Europeana project. For
the Search Service and Structured Browse Service relevant YADDA services
will be considered,
which proved to be mature,
stable and performant,
and
are already successfully used in a number of European large scale content
infrastructures.
The YADDA Search Service,
based on the Apache Lucene
search system is well prepared to be installed and integrated within the whole
system. Subsequently, a Solr [
31
] based YADDA Search Service version will be
20
W. Sylwestrzak, J. Borbinha, T. Bouche, A. Nowi ´
nski, P. Sojka
evaluated, and solutions that enhance the indexing system with support for
math formulae will be sought.
4.3
Extensions
The other expected functions,
including annotation,
accessibility,
metadata
enhancer or association analyser will be realised as separate enriching services,
that while following the same service design principles,
will be considered
extension services.
Examples of such services include the Citation Service,
responsible for citation resolving and indexing or Similarity Service [
26
,
27
],
which would be able to return similar objects based on a predefined metrics
and criteria. Similarly, additional extension services are hoped to be developed
in the future by third parties or by the involved partners.
4.4
Interfaces
One or more Web User Interface Services will be developed,
based on user
requirements criteria. Functional interfaces and widgets may also be prepared
to make it possible to include an “EuDML Search Box” in other local systems
and portals. A widget configurator may be developed, making it easy for users
to create tailored search interfaces for their own websites.
Other functional
interfaces will
be also designed and implemented for services related to
interoperability, based on common standards such as OAI-PMH, or on Web
services,
following the SOAP or REST paradigms where reasonable.
All the
system’s operations will be managed through a process management service,
which will be responsible for operation scheduling, synchronisation and timely
execution, and for the overall system level integrity of the services.
On a different
level,
the authorization and authentication services will
ensure secure service-to-service operations, and users authentication required
to personalize their accounts environment and to access any restricted contents.
A YADDA AAS2 service, playing a similar role in European Repository DRIVER
infrastructure will be considered for this purpose.
4.5
Layered Services
An important feature of the EuDML system architecture is its layered service
structure, as seen in Figure 3 on the facing page. Each service has a pluggable
layer for service remote access,
allowing to avoid the necessity to select a
single service access method and then to support
only it
throughout
the
system’s lifetime.
In EuDML,
each service will be defined using a common
pattern of a separate API for the client interface (service facade) operating on
a common service interface suitable for remote access. A proper definition of
the service interface layer, with error encapsulation and strict request-response
pattern makes it ideally suited for enabling remote access with any of the
existing technologies, including SOAP Web Services, RESTful services, RMI,
EuDML—Towards the European Digital Mathematics Library
21
Service Facade API
Service read
interface
Service Write
interface
Service logic
Service read
interface
Service Write
interface
Software acceses
Service
Custom remoting protocol
Fig. 3. EuDML service layers
HTTP invoke or no remoting (direct invocation) at all. At the same time the
facade interface can be easily extended with any method required. Using well
established enterprise frameworks,
like Spring,
will allow to define remote
operation method independently of the source code.
In a centralized,
high
performance scenario, local services will be able to talk to each other directly
through their service interfaces, while in a rich, distributed environment, well
documented and stable Service Facade APIs shall be exposed for other services
to use. This added level of flexibility will allow the infrastructure or subsets
thereof to be installed and used in various deployment scenarios, from a high
performance single SMP machine based centralised system, through a multiple
low-end machines deployment to eventually a global distributed infrastructure.
It is expected that after completion of the initial design phases, where the
detailed functional specification and system architecture,
internal metadata
format and metadata mappings will be defined,
a prototype system will be
implemented. The fully functional system is expected to be deployed at the end
of 2012.
22
W. Sylwestrzak, J. Borbinha, T. Bouche, A. Nowi ´
nski, P. Sojka
5
Main Challenges
One of the typical challenges of any large scale digital library system dealing
with heterogeneous, distributed content is the optimal metadata harmonisation.
While all the typical issues related to content multilingualism, different data
provenance and quality,
versioning,
duplicate content,
or
need to merge
controlled vocabularies are present in EuDML,
it is hoped that through the
use of adequate flexible tools it will be possible to reiterate and optimize the
chosen solution. Additionally, exploiting the fact that all the content in question
is either mathematical by its nature or closely related to mathematics, should
allow to apply mathematical knowledge management techniques to overcome
the barriers and find the mathematics-specific relations between individual
objects and their groups. To this end, provisions for extensive text mining will
be supported, and adequate data structures, and appropriate analytic tools will
be designed.
Besides the metadata harmonisation issues, it is apparent that in order to
be adequately comprehensive, a mathematical knowledge environment has to
be able to manage both open access and restricted licensed content.
On the
technical level, this will be handled by the AA service developed at ICM and
successfully used in DRIVER and YADDA systems (where open content has to
seamlessly co-exist with millions of restricted licensed articles and books from
commercial publishers).
However,
the challenge lies in the careful design of
license usage scenarios, so that the system would be considered trustworthy by
the commercial mathematical content providers.
An obvious challenge will
be not
only implementing the mathematics
specific user interface functions (such as formulae presentation, which parsing
is still often a performance bottleneck) but also supporting mathematics specific
functions by the backend services (such as formulae search). In the future, close
integration with existing mathematics tools and environments is planned.
An important challenge, probably rudimentary for the EuDML’s success,
although not of technical nature will be to position the service as a recognized
authoritative information source not only in the mathematicians environment,
but
also for the services and users of
all
other disciplines,
searching for
mathematical knowledge. One of the prerequisites for this will be to select and
accumulate a critical mass of quality content, trusted and relevant to our users
(this is assured by the content contributed by the partners) and services (which
is the reachable goal described in this paper) taking advantage of the potential
and the resources of the project partners. Another issue, not to be neglected, is
maintaining high level of true interoperability with other subject specific and
general content infrastructures not only on European but also international
level.
6
Future Directions
One of the important issues not being addressed directly at the present state
is the long-term preservation of the mathematical
content.
It is feared that
EuDML—Towards the European Digital Mathematics Library
23
without proper preservation and curation activities some of the publications
eventually will be, and some probably already are lost to the community. While
the proposed DML system currently does not encompass the complete long-
term preservation procedures, it will provide the infrastructural support for
their future implementation. Moreover, providing the centralized registry view
and control
mechanisms,
it will
make it possible to detect the endangered
items in advance. Besides, EuDML may keep electronic copies not only of the
metadata but also of the original content fulltexts for its internal processing
purposes, that can be also used for emergency recovery. It is essential that these
opportunities are exploited and proper long-time preservation strategies are
designed and implemented as soon as possible.
Another issue to be considered is the eventual full distribution of the service.
While a complete distribution may not be viable for performance reasons, it
should be considered as an additional service reliability measure. The system
is being designed with a distributed model of operation in mind from the very
beginning. However it is assumed, that for the first several years, it will operate
from ICM’s redundant servers in Warsaw.
As ICM operates three separate
datacentres, it is planned that servers in two distinct locations in Warsaw will
be used. Only after the systems fault tolerance and failover mechanisms are
implemented and verified, would a larger scale distribution be reasonable.
A larger long-term organizational
and technological
challenge will
be
encompassing all the mathematical contents beyond our first day partners’, first
by cooperating with more European collections, publicly or privately owned,
freely or non-freely accessible, then by extending geographically beyond the
continent’s boundaries.
One of the important future issues is to establish a
model for cooperation with the publishers.
Finally,
it is planned to expand
the EuDML infrastructure to integrate external tools and environments, both
mathematics related and other relevant. Particularly valuable will be EuDML
content and services integration with other international knowledge and content
management infrastructures.
7
Conclusions
After many years of efforts, finally the dream of many European mathematicians
to have a common digital library of mathematical contents comes true. This is
the first breakthrough towards a universal DML since the advent of isolated
digitisation programmes around the world at the turn of the 21
th
century. We
thus hope it will help shape and drive the forthcoming efforts towards a more
comprehensive worldwide digital mathematics library. Special attention has to
be paid in order not to waste this chance.
While the current consortium, building the EuDML system, forms a strong
group of reliable partners, the system’s sustainability and further development
after the project ends will be challenge.
It is identified as such and will be
specifically addressed as one of the activities scheduled in the project. However,
some of the provisions allowing us to trust in the true EuDML sustainability
24
W. Sylwestrzak, J. Borbinha, T. Bouche, A. Nowi ´
nski, P. Sojka
include the design of gradual development through modular upgrades and
extensions of
the technologies already developed by individual
partners,
relatively wide community support from the very beginning of the project,
with many stakeholders directly involved and the EMS chairing the advisory
committee,
and the fact that the infrastructure will
be directly maintained
and operated by the partners with many years experience in quality service
provisioning.
The open questions remaining include subsequent funding scheme, need to
design and implement archival policies, the way to cooperate most efficiently
with commercial publishers, and the way towards eventually opening access to
all mathematical contents.
Acknowledgement
EuDML project is partly financed by the European Union through its Com-
petitiveness and Innovation Programme (Information and Communications
Technologies Policy Support Programme, “Open access to scientific informa-
tion”, Grant Agreement no. 250,503).
References
1.
Miroslav Bartošek, Martin Lhoták, Jiˇ
rí Rákosník, Petr Sojka, and Martin Šárfy.
DML-
CZ: The Objectives and the First Steps.
In: Borwein et al. [4], pages 69–79.
2.
Hans Becker,
Kari
Stange,
and Bernd Wegner,
editors.
New Developments in
Electronic publishing.
FIZ Karlsruhe,
2004.
http://www.emis.de/proceedings/
Stockholm2004/
.
3.
José Borbinha.
Digital Libraries and the Rebirth of Printed Journals.
In: Borwein
et al. [4], pages 97–110.
4.
Jonathan Borwein,
Eugénio M.
Rocha,
and José Francisco Rodrigues,
editors.
Communicating Mathematics in the Digital Era, MA, USA, 2008. A. K. Peters.
5.
Thierry Bouche.
Introducing the mini-DML Project.
In: Becker et al. [
2
], pages 19–29.
http://www.emis.de/proceedings/Stockholm2004/bouche.pdf
.
6.
Thierry Bouche.
Some Thoughts on the Near-Future Digital Mathematics Library.
In: Sojka [30], pages 3–15.
http://dml.cz/dmlcz/702540
.
7.
Thierry Bouche.
Towards a Digital Mathematics Library?
In:
Borwein et al.
[
4
],
pages 43–68.
8.
Thierry Bouche.
Digital
Mathematics Libraries:
The Good,
the Bad,
the Ugly.
Mathematics in Computer Science,
3(3):227–241,
May 2010.
http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s11786-010-0029-2
.
9.
Thierry Bouche.
Introducing EuDML—The European Digital Mathematics Library.
EMS newsletter, 76:11–16, June 2010.
http://www.ems-ph.org/journals/journal.
php?jrn=news
.
10.
BulDML.
Bulgarian DML at the Institute of Mathematics and Informatics at the
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences.
http://sci-gems.math.bas.bg/
.
11.
CEDRAM.
Centre de diffusion de revues académiques mathématiques.
http:
//www.cedram.org/
.
12.
ELibM.
The Electronic Library of Mathematics of the European Mathematical
Information Service.
http://www.emis.de/journals/
.
EuDML—Towards the European Digital Mathematics Library
25
13.
Sarah E.
Thomas et
al.
Digital
Mathematics Library.
Final
Report.
Technical
Report NSF Award # DUE-02066-40, Cornell University, 2004.
http://www.library.
cornell.edu/dmlib/DMLreport_final.pdf
.
14.
Thomas Fischer.
The Digitization Registry at SUB Göttingen. A Step towards a DML
Registry.
In:
Becker et al.
[
2
],
pages 55–63.
http://www.emis.de/proceedings/
Stockholm2004/fischer.pdf
.
15.
HDML.
Hellenic DML at
Ionian University.
http://dspace.eap.gr/dspace/
handle/123456789/46
.
16.
ISO/IEC JTC1 SC32 WG2.
ISO 11179—Metadata Registries (MDR),
2009.
http:
//metadata-stds.org/11179
.
17.
ISO/IEC JTC1 SC32 WG2.
ISO/IEC 20944—Metadata Registry Interoperability and
Bindings (MDRIB), 2009.
http://metadata-stds.org/20944
.
18.
Allyn Jackson.
The Digital Mathematics Library.
Notices of Am. Math. Soc., 50(4):918–
923, 2003.
http://www.ams.org/notices/200308/comm-jackson.pdf
.
19.
Enrique Macias-Virgós.
Some Digitization Initiatives in Spain.
In: Becker et al. [
2
],
pages 137–142.
http://www.emis.de/proceedings/Stockholm2004/virgos.pdf
.
20.
Zentralblatt MATH.
A reviewing database.
http://www.zentralblatt-math.org/
zmath/
.
21.
NUMDAM.
Numérisation de documents anciens de mathématiques.
http:
//www.numdam.org/
.
22.
Committee on Electronic Information Communication of the International Mathe-
matical Union.
Best current practices: Recommendations on electronic information
communication.
Notices Am. Math. Soc., 49(8):922–925, 2002.
http://www.ams.org/
notices/200208/comm-practices.pdf
.
23.
Committee on Electronic Information Communication of the International Mathe-
matical Union.
Digital Mathematics Library: A Vision for the Future, 2006.
Endorsed
on August 20,
2006 by the General Assembly of the International Mathematical
Union.
http://www.mathunion.org/ceic/Publications/dml_vision.pdf
.
24.
OpenAIRE.
Open Access Infrastructure for Research in Europe.
http://www.
openaire.eu/
.
25.
DRIVER project.
Networking European Scientific Repositories.
http://www.
driver-repository.eu/
.
26.
Radim
ˇ
Reh ˚
uˇ
rek and Petr Sojka.
Automated Classification and Categorization
of
Mathematical
Knowledge.
In:
Serge Autexier,
John Campbell,
Julio Rubio,
Volker Sorge,
Masakazu Suzuki,
and Freek Wiedijk,
editors,
Intelligent Computer
Mathematics—Proceedings of 7
th
International Conference on Mathematical Knowledge
Management MKM 2008, volume 5144 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science LNCS/LNAI,
pages 543–557, Berlin, Heidelberg, July 2008. Springer-Verlag.
27.
Radim
ˇ
Reh ˚
uˇ
rek and Petr Sojka.
Software Framework for Topic Modelling with
Large Corpora.
In:
Proceedings of
LREC 2010 workshop New Challenges for
NLP Frameworks.
pp.
45–50.
Valletta,
Malta (2010),
software available at
http:
//nlp.fi.muni.cz/projekty/gensim
.
28.
REPOX.
A Metadata Repository Manager.
http://repox.ist.utl.pt/
.
29.
RusDML.
Russian DML.
http://www.rusdml.de/
.
30.
Petr Sojka, editor.
Towards a Digital Mathematics Library, Birmingham, UK, July 2008.
Masaryk University.
http://www.fi.muni.cz/~sojka/dml-2008-program.xhtml
.
31.
Solr.
An open source search platform.
http://lucene.apache.org/solr/
.
32.
Bernd Wegner.
EMANI—Leader and Follower for the WDML.
In: Becker et al. [
2
],
pages 161–169.
http://www.emis.de/proceedings/Stockholm2004/wegner.pdf
.
26
W. Sylwestrzak, J. Borbinha, T. Bouche, A. Nowi ´
nski, P. Sojka
33.
Bernd Wegner.
RusDML 2008: Current Facilities of the Core Archive of Digitized
Russian Publications in Mathematics.
In: Sojka [
30
], pages 83–86.
http://dml.cz/
dmlcz/702547
.
34.
XMDR.
eXtended MetaData Registry.
https://xmdr.org/
.
35.
YADDA.
A digital
content
management
and provisioning platform.
http:
//yaddainfo.icm.edu.pl/
.
36.
Katarzyna Zamły ´
nska, Łukasz Bolikowski, and Tomasz Rosiek.
Migration of the
Mathematical Collection of Polish Virtual Library of Science to the YADDA platform.
In: Sojka [30], pages 127–130.
http://dml.cz/dmlcz/702538
.
37.
Katarzyna Zamły ´
nska, Alek Tarkowski, and Tomasz Rosiek.
Evolution of the Mathe-
matical Collection of the Polish Virtual Library of Science.
Mathematics in Computer
Science, 3(3):265–278, May 2010.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11786-010-0022-9
.
